Mass Media Exposing Representations of Reality Through Critical Inquiry

Marvin Starominski-Uehara, PhD
Risk Management Consultant, Japan
muehara79@gmail.com
Abstract

The covid-19 pandemic has brought to fore the key role that mass media plays in shaping
collective risk perception. This paper looks at the inquiry process carried out by Brazilian
journalists covering the first public interview of a newly appointed Health Minister. It bases this
analysis on the precept of ‘a priori intuition’ by Immanuel Kant in 'Critique of Pure Reason'. The
paper argues that, contrary to common sense, journalists can more accurately shape
representations of reality, while clarifying authorities’ statements, by arbitrarily depriving
themselves from prior knowledge and relying, instead, on personalizing space and time in the
inquiry process.
Keywords: covid-19; journalism; Kant; discourse analysis; Brazil; critical inquiry

Introduction
Brazil is a ​sui generis case in this unprecedented global health crisis. It has been dealing with a
sanitary crisis and a heightened political one at the same time (​Prado, 2020)​. Daily news are
intertwined by political clashes and the tallying of deaths for the novel coronavirus
(SARS-cov-2). Journalists in the country generally agree that covering the sanitary crisis should
prevail in the mainstream media (​Gomes, 2020)​. Nonetheless, the political drama the country is
engulfed in yields appealing commercial headlines while many people are at home eager for
information on the epidemic and how politics might affect its development. This paper argues
that, beyond the need to generate audience traction for commercial purposes, the primary role of
the mass media in times of uncertainty is helping viewers and readers unravel conflicting
narratives by challenging unscrupulous rewards of confirmation bias (​Klayman, 1995) ​and
exposing the benefits of triggering cognitive dissonance (​Knobloch-Westerwick & Kleinman,
2012)​.

Shaping reality by personalizing the representation of uncertainty is the strategy used by the
Brazilian president to enforce his agenda. The president has demanded the end of isolation and
social distancing to contain the spread of the novel coronavirus by claiming that the economic
crisis these preventive measures ensue to be worse than the epidemic itself (Ribeiro, 2020). Such
a dichotomy, or fallacy, intentionally discounts the efficacy of non-pharmaceutical measures in
reducing and even temporarily eliminating the rates of transmission for this pathogen (​Ferguson
et al., 2020)​. It also deliberately conceals the ingrained fear of the president and his entourage
that an economic downturn will have on the chances of securing a new mandate. Responding to
this fear, the president has repeatedly downplayed i) the severity of this disease (Congresso Em
Foco, 2020); ii) the effectiveness of mitigation measures to slow down the rates of infection
(Behnke, 2020) and iii) used every opportunity to consistently convey his particular perception
of reality (Folha de S. Paulo, 2020a).

One of the president’s communication strategies to seek support and seed discord is painting a
fatalistic picture of this crisis (Brandão, 2020). He states that he himself as well his close
relatives are also at risk of falling ill and perishing from this disease (Weterman, 2020). Such
'personal' risk is genuinely false. The circumstances that the president and his relatives find
themselves in are diametrically opposed to the state of millions of people living under the
poverty line. There are also several examples that containment and mitigation measures can
effectively break the chains of infection if they are planned, coordinated and implemented
accordingly. These examples have been purposefully omitted by the federal government as it
risks exposing the lack of preparedness (O Globo, 2020), dysfunctionality (IstoÉ, 2020) and
inability of the current administration in dealing with this sanitary crisis (Picheta & Siad, 2020).

The appointment of a new Health Minister to design and coordinate the national strategy against
the novel coronavirus highlights the political instability in the country. On April 22nd, 2020, five
days after taking office, the new minister gave his first public interview (UOL, 2020). This
briefing lasted for nearly ten minutes followed by three questions. The objective of this briefing
was to outline the new strategy of the federal government to address the epidemic and

demonstrate alignment to the president's representation of reality. The decision to select this
event to analyze the role of public inquiring in shaping collective risk perception lies in the
significance of this case. The Brazilian society longed to hear from the highest health authority
how the federal government planned to reduce the rates of infection, treat the infected, and
gradually reopen the economy. This first briefing is also particularly important because it sets the
expectation over the ability of the new minister to adequately manage this public health crisis.
Journalists covering this briefing were expected to ask unbiased questions that would help the
public at large grasp uncertainty and assess the risk of this pathogen to their wellbeing.

Theoretical Framework

Journalism is one of the pillars of democracy (​Barnett, 2009)​. Journalists conceptualize freedom
by uncovering the intricacies of pivotal political events (​Bardoel & d'Haenens, 2004)​. Their work
feeds individuals with information that shapes the way a predicament is appreciated (​Caple &
Bednarek, 2013)​. Journalists, however, are not always exempt from biases (​Starkey, 2006)​.
Reporters covering the work of public authorities often frame their questions based on the
orientation of their employers (​Van Dalen, 2012)​.

The risk of framing inquiry processes is depriving society from reliable empirical evidence
juxtaposed in conflicting narratives. The mass media is understood to have commercial interests
in a competitive environment to not challenge some political views (​Albarran, 2008)​. They often
gain access, rights and increase their revenues if they decide to follow the ​status quo (​​Street,
2010:179)​. The downside of such an approach is the eroding of the critical thinking ability of the
general population to assess the risks of a crisis to their life and routine (​Durfee, 2006). The mass
media and its journalists, therefore, are expected to not shy away from challenging assumptions
and premises behind political narratives. Media networks that foster resourceful debates and are
not afraid of incurring the costs of shifting opinions after the emergence of conflicting evidence
benefits from increasing levels of perceived trust and credibility (​Williams, 2012)​.

Journalists seeking the truth in developing stories also face the challenge of keeping abreast of
the latest news and facts during critical times. It is believed that well-informed journalists are in
position to craft more insightful questions (​Nisbet, & Fahy, 2015)​. This paper argues the
opposite. Assuming that i) memory is bounded and selective, thus fallible (​Pluviano, 2019)​; ii)
the digital era of knowledge production is subject to biases and hidden agendas (​Fisher, 2018)​,
particularly in times of crisis and uncertainty (​van Zoonen & van der Meer, 2015); and iii) the
representation of reality relates to personal experience (​Lear, 2017)​, this paper posits that inquiry
processes aimed at effectively exposing contradictions, incoherences and shallow thinking in
public statements should focus on personalizing questions that reveal interviewee’s perceptions
of space and time. That is, journalists are more likely to gather valuable information to their
network and the public alike by crafting straightforward questions based on fundamental
cognitive traits that invoke past experiences, which help uncover the order, susceptibility and
predisposition of an individual’s thoughts, beliefs and interests.

Immanuel Kant in 'Critique of Pure Reason' proposes that our minds are subjected to forms of
space and time. Space and time are ​sine qua non for our experiences and thus essential to
understand how we gain knowledge and develop insights into how our mind works (​Brook,
2010)​. Space and time for Kant are moving objects (​Allison, 2006)​. This means that we only
have a vague idea, or ‘a priori intuition’, of how our particular notions of space and time shape
our representations of the world (​Merritt, 2010)​. That is, space and time are i) not entirely
dependent on our own personal experiences; ii) they are unique in the sense that they are private
and change over time; and iii) recent memories and close events seem to carry more weight in
our decisions (​Janiak, 2009)​. This paper, therefore, proposes the instrumental use of these
cognitive elements to help journalists craft questions that expose how the experience of
authorities shape their representations of reality and the weight of intuition in their decisions.
Kant states that the knowledge of the language in which the communication between the parties
occur is enough to carry out this critical analysis (​McLaughlin & Schlaudt, 2020)​. The
expectation of resorting to Kant's cognitive studies is steering away political debates from trivial

and manufactured representations found in performative and rhetorical disputes that promote
misinformation and may put lives unnecessarily at risk.

It is worth noting that this paper taps into Kant's ideas of space and time as a form to guide
inquiry processes during uncertain times. It is not the purpose of this paper to engage in a
philosophical debate over i) the interpretations of 'Critique of Pure Reason' (​Strawson, 2018)​; ii)
the origins and place of Kant in Western philosophy (​Wood, 2007)​; or iii) review his extensive
work (​Scott, 2016)​. The motivation in resorting to Kant's transcendental idealism is the
understanding that his studies on metaphysics can contribute to the assessment of how public
authorities represent reality and how professionals in the communication sector could make use
of cognitive psychology to gather valuable information during challenging times.
Figure 1

Retrieved from Janiak (2009)

Figure 1 shows that Kant regards our intuition as an objective, conscious representation. Intuition
for Kant happens when we represent some X, such as an event, directly and without
intermediaries. Journalists can represent the sanitary crisis in Brazil by indicating clearly and
directly which event they are referring to such as the number of deaths from a specific locality in
a particular period of time. This is different from making a conscious and objective
representation of an event as a concept. An event is represented as a concept when we refer to it
by using a mediated concept. We may represent the seriousness of a sanitary crisis by alluding to
the editorial of a scientific journal. This paper argues that journalists, in order to expose
manipulative language, ignorance and shallow thinking, should structure questions invoking the
a priori intuition of authorities. Journalists are expected to make direct references to the forms of
space and time in their critical inquiry to expose how authorities’ personal experiences are
mentally organized and classified. In the absence of literal forms of space and time, which may

require prior knowledge, this paper suggests inquirers to ask direct and simple questions based
on the propositions put forth by public authorities (see on Table 1 a list of ‘a priori intuition’
questions deprived of prior knowledge).

Method

The statement of the minister, questions asked by reporters, and the minister's answers are the
object of analysis in this study. The objective is to assess the content of these statements and how
they could be logically challenged without any prior knowledge of the crisis itself. Before
starting the review of statements and proposed recommendations, it is necessary to provide an
overview of the structure of the ten-minute statement.

The minister opens up outlining how the new ministry will address the covid-19 epidemic and
the health system across the country. He divides the federal strategy into three areas: i)
information; ii) infra-structure; and iii) national guidance for regional and local governments
regarding mitigation measures for covid-19. By 'information', he starts off claiming that the
government knows very little about the disease. This lack of knowledge creates barriers for
making informed decisions, he adds. He points out some statistics that are necessary. He also
stresses the importance of including under ‘information’, the number of sick people not infected
with this pathogen. He expresses concern that other sick people have not been seeking treatments
for their chronic diseases. He also stresses the importance of considering the plight of health
insurance plans in the context of an economic fallout. He argues that economic downturn risks
putting further stress onto the public health system. The minister then abruptly turns to the
condition of hospitals. He briefly talks about getting them ready for covid-19 patients before
revealing his concern for hospitals facing lower demand for other types of illnesses. He is
worried about how hospitals will financially survive in this crisis. And the longer this crisis lasts,
he warns, the harder it will be for hospital administrations.

He continues explaining his concern to the no-treatment of no-covid-19 patients by predicting
that another crisis is looming: that once this epidemic is over, hospitals will not be able to treat
patients suffering from other diseases. He then states that the ministry is focused on the system
despite the current discussion being mainly about covid-19. The minister then reveals that there
is a sketch for the creation of a database with other ministries and the private sector.

In relation to 'infra-structure', he first hesitates. He briefly claims the ministry is planning
something but then states that the problem is that the ministry is taking care of people today (sic).
He then generally mentions hospitals, ventilators, intensive care units, human resources. He asks
people to understand that the crisis is still unfolding. He uses an example in the United States to
illustrate the unexpected shortage of medicines for patients being intubated. This example, he
argues, serves to showcase that the Brazilian government is looking not only at what makes
headlines but also at other details to provide care to patients. He then relates this topic to the
announcement that he is working closely with a high-rank military official. He defends that
having this army official in his office will increase the efficiency of how the health ministry
operates. He then hesitates once again and quickly shifts to the third category of this briefing:
'national guidance for covid-19'.

He starts off using real and hypothetical statistics to compare and contrast people infected with
the novel coronavirus and the sick with other diseases. He then mentions herd immunity and the
timeline for the development of a vaccine, along with the non-exponential increase of infections,
to imply that herd immunity could be the solution for this sanitary crisis in the country. He then
forcefully states that it is impossible for a country to survive one or one year and a half if the
economy shuts down. He says that isolation can be part of the initial response to the epidemic but
not part of the exit strategy. It is this 'exit strategy', he adds, that the federal government will help
state and local governments with.
Having finished the explanation of this outline, the minister cites some numbers to claim that
Brazil is one of the best in the world in dealing with covid-19. He compares death per million in
Brazil with statistics from Germany, France, Spain, the UK, and the US. He says the country has

one of the best statistics in comparison with these countries. He adds that the problem with
covid-19 is that it scares people because it creates a surge of demand for health systems. He then
explains that health systems are not built to have idleness. Health systems need to work with
maximum efficiency. 'Health is too expensive', he states. Based on this logic, hospitals work
close to full capacity. Under these circumstances, he explains that when something overburdens
the system, it is nearly impossible to adapt to the new norm at the same rate. He uses this
rationale to back up once again the need to work closely with a high-rank military official. He
summarizes this part of the briefing as being the new guidelines for the new Health Ministry.

He then resorts to more statistics to compare and contrast the rates for the infected, the dead and
the recovered. He acknowledges the situation is difficult and complex but the government can
overcome this challenge. And more importantly, he concludes, improve the health system after
the covid-19 crisis is over.

The first question was made by a journalist from an outlet that supports the government (​Filho,
2020)​. The reporter asks for examples of exit strategies and which localities could start
implementing them.

The minister says he does not have an answer but can tell how the ministry will do it. He says
that national guidelines for this strategy need another week to be refined. He believes that this
timeline is reasonable considering that he has been in office for five days. He says that due to the
size and complexity of the country, these exit strategies need to be locally tailored. He points to
the metrics of possible new infected cases added by the past cases, the number of beds available,
and the status of human resources. He then says that projections are very complex. He explains
that mathematical models try to predict what will happen. He then cites the numbers from
Imperial College for death rates and how these numbers could be substantially reduced with
some sort of non-pharmaceutical intervention. He claims that the sharp reduction in this
projection, as suggested by the model of Imperial College, is impossible. He says that
mathematical models need to be standardized. The problem of models, even if they are

methodologically correct, is that they largely depend on the premises they are designed with, he
explains. The data used to run models determines the outcome. Thus, he states, we need to
compare different models with different projections. And the main problem is that if the numbers
of these projections are too alarming, and people start taking them for granted, the government
risks increasing the fear and expectation of society. So, he says, the ministry will reveal its own
model within a week for states and municipalities to use it for benchmark. The minister adds that
the federal model will include different subgroups. He also states that the model needs to reflect
reality accurately. He claims that models making long-term projections make too many mistakes.
Thus the government needs to make short-term projections and quickly adapt if circumstances
change. He argues that the government cannot guess what it is going to happen in the long term.
'This is impossible', he concludes.

The second question was asked by a reporter from a different television channel but also
supportive of the current administration (​Filho, 2020)​. The question asks the minister for his
opinion on the risk of relaxing mitigation measures currently in place considering that it might
lead to higher infection rates and to the collapse of regional health systems already operating
close to full capacity.

The minister says that he does not believe that the number of infections and the surge in demand
for hospitals will happen at the same time. He then adds that his job is to ensure that his plan will
work out. He tells the reporter that these variables, in addition to the one the reporter mentioned
about the possibility of being reinfected, make it harder to understand this disease. So the
government is making an effort to understand this disease better. The government needs the
number from each region to provide guidance to each locality. He wants people to understand
that there is no magic bullet for this crisis. He claims that ideas to address this crisis are not
inherently bad or good but poorly or well used. So, he states, 'we need wisdom to use what we
have'. He cites the example of mass testing. 'There is no mass testing', he affirms citing South
Korea, which, according to the minister, has conducted eleven thousand tests per million people.
He says that this is not a population testing, this is not mass testing. What we need to do, he adds,

is to ensure that the sample of our tests reflect the population. He then cites Italy, which, he says,
conducted twenty-five tests per million, more than double of South Korea, and despite that, the
crisis was a disaster in Italy. He wants to show the reporter that it is important to have wisdom to
have data and interpret it to make informed decisions on the actions required to take. 'This is
what will make every difference', he finalizes.

The third question was from a reporter from a third media network but also biased towards the
incumbent president's opinion on reopening the economy (​Folha de S. Paulo, 2020)​. The
question is about mass testing and the relaxation of social isolation policies against the spread of
the novel coronavirus particularly in Brasilia, the capital of the country.

The minister starts differentiating between the test for diagnosis and immunity tests. He states
that each type of test has its limitations. The important strategy at the moment, he adds, is how
the tests will be distributed. Then he adds that it is important, according to the model he
mentioned earlier, to continuously monitor (unclear) to decide whether the strategy needs to be
reviewed. He repeats that when 'you know little about something, you do not know what is going
to happen, so you need to be fast enough to make a diagnosis and take action'. So, he says, that if
something happens, the government should review its strategy. He then continues saying that ‘if
one does not master a subject, we need to test, and the capacity is to test and act', he explains. He
adds: 'Test, monitor the effects of early interventions, and follow up on next steps'. He concludes
saying that testing is not important but the decisions you make based on the test you have
conducted.

Results and Discussion

The statement and answers provided by the minister, in addition to questions asked, highlighted
three main aspects. First, the federal government openly favors the media channels amenable to
the ​status quo narratives. Journalists from these channels asked general questions along the lines
of the government's agenda. Second, the minister indicated that he is aligned with the president's

opinion that the relaxation of isolation and social distancing should take effect as soon as
possible. Third, the strategy of the federal government to reduce the risk of transmission for this
pathogen is unclear. The newly appointed minister shows confusion, ignorance to international
best practices, manipulative language and lack of understanding of scientific methods underlying
contingency planning and decision making under uncertainty.

The assumptions behind statements and flaws in critical thinking by the minister and reporters
need to be exposed for the enhancement of planning and decision making in crisis management.
Kant's ideas on how the intuition of authorities, or their notions of space and time, affect their
representation of reality provide a roadmap in this regard. Suggested questions listed below
follow the idea of Kant that for our intuition to be an objective, conscious representation of
reality, it is necessary that we make direct references to personal notions of space and time. Such
references are expected to help the public grasp complexity while critically assessing political
statements. The expectation is met if reporters asking questions i) put aside any prior knowledge
about the subject and focus instead on logic and ii) 'personalize' every question so that the
analysis of the problem reveals the boundaries in the rationality of the interviewee. 'Personalize'
in this paper means resorting to notions of space and time that bring the problem in question as
close as possible to the a priori intuition of the authority being questioned.
Table 1
Statement

‘a priori intuition’ question

Space

Time

The minister has been recently
appointed.

What experiences do you have to lead the
country in this crisis?

you have

this

How is your background different from the
previous health minister?

your background

previous

The government knows very little
about the novel coronavirus and
covid-19.

What is your experience on pandemics?

your experience

pandemics

The need of some statistics to
make informed decisions.

How many deaths do you think are necessary to
make up for enough data?

you think

enough

Present and future concern for
no-covid-19 patients.

Can you tell what is the timeline and cost of
treating covid-19 patients?

you tell

timeline

Economic depression will affect
health insurance which in turn
will affect the public health
system.

Do you know how many Brazilians right now
hold a private health insurance policy?

you know

right now

Getting hospitals ready to treat
covid-19 patients.

Can you explain how you will help a public
hospital in a poor area get ready to treat covid-19
patients?

you explain

covid-19
patients

Concern about hospitals not
surviving through this crisis.

Is your concern in this crisis on private or public
hospitals?

your concern

this

Another crisis is looming: the
treatment of patients with other
chronic diseases.

When do you think this crisis started in the
country and when it will be over?

you think

started/be
over

Do you know if there are hospitals that can treat
covid-19 and non-covid-19 patients at the same
time?

you know

at the same
time

The ministry is focused on the
health system.

How did you instruct your team to prioritize
tasks within this 'system'?

you instruct

prioritize

There is a plan to create a
database across the government
and with the help of the private
sector.

Can you explain why this database has yet not
been ready?

you explain

yet

Can you show how the other ministries will
contribute to this database?

you show

will

Why do you think the federal government needs
the help of the private sector in creating this
database?

you think

this

The ministry is planning
something in terms of
infra-structure.

Can you provide more details about this plan on
'infra-structure'?

you provide

this

Under infra-structure, it was
mentioned hospitals, ventilators,
intensive care units, human
resources.

What is your plan for each 'infra-structure' in the
next few weeks?

your plan

in the next
few weeks

The federal government is looking
at all the details to provide care
during this crisis.

Can you tell what these other details are?

you tell

are

Decision to work closely with an
army official.

Did you consider other candidates before making
this decision?

you consider

before

Key statistics needed such as the
rates for the infected, the dead and
the recovered.

Can you explain why each of these statistics is
important?

you explain

these

Do you think these statistics reflect what is
happening?

you think

is happening

Can you tell the stories that these statistics do not
show in this crisis?

you tell

this

Can you anticipate how the health system will be
better once this crisis is over?

you anticipate

over

His plan for the ministry will
improve the health system once

this crisis is over.
First reporter asked for examples
of exit strategies and localities
that could start implementing
these strategies.

How would you instruct a small shop on safely
resuming operations?

you instruct

resuming

Informing the date when the
release of a national guideline on
how state and local governments
can implement exit strategies will
happen. He considered this
timeline reasonable.

Can you share the challenges in releasing a
national guideline within this timeline?

you share

within

Can you tell who the people are working on
designing this guideline?

you tell

working on

The necessity for the national
guideline to be locally tailored.

What do you think are the risks of leaving to
state and local governments to manage this
crisis?

you think

this

How do you see the role of the federal
government in this crisis?

you see

this

Do you think this national guideline can be
flexible and effective at the same time?

you think

at the same
time

Are you considering international best practices
in the development of this guideline?

you considering

this

The following metrics could be
incorporated into the upcoming
national guideline: possible new
infected cases added by the past
cases, the number of beds
available, and the status of human
resources.

Can you explain how local governments in rural
areas can calculate 'possible new infected cases'?

you explain

new

Can you explain the reasons why 'new infected
cases' are added to 'past cases'?

you explain

added

Do you know if these are all the metrics to be
included in this national guideline?

you know

this

Being skeptical about a
non-pharmaceutical intervention
substantially reducing the number
of deaths.

What is your experience in modelling to affirm
that it is impossible to believe in the projection
made by Imperial College?

your experience

projection

Can you show what are the other models that the
government is using to support its decisions?

you show

is using

Can you explain why models need to be
standardized and how you plan to do that?

you explain

plan

Do you know if the models used by the
government are standardized?

you know

are

The minister classifies as a
'problem' the fact that models are
highly dependent on the premises
they are designed with.

How would you make models less dependent on
the premises they are designed with?

you make

are

The federal government needs to
compare different models with
different projections.

Why do you need to compare models if they are
to be standardized as you have just said?

you need

just

Can you point to which models featuring
different projections the government is relying
on?

you point

relying on

Models need to be standardized.

Can you explain how you select the projections
of one model over another?

you explain

select

What are 'alarming numbers' for you in this
crisis?

for you

this

Can you explain what causes these numbers to
increase or decrease?

you explain

these

Are you implying that 'alarming numbers' should
be omitted by the government?

you implying

should

Why do you think people fear these 'alarming
numbers'?

you think

these

How can you reduce the public fear caused by
these 'alarming numbers'?

you reduce

these

Why do you think this model will be better than
the one used by Imperial College?

you think

used by

Do you think states and municipalities have the
capacity to collect data, run this model and
interpret data from this upcoming federal model?

you think

upcoming

Can you explain how the output of these models
will help local authorities make informed
decisions?

you explain

will

The minister adds that the federal
model will include different
subgroups.

Can you detail which subgroups will be
included?

you detail

will

The minister argues that models
must reflect reality accurately.

The word model does not seem to imply reality.
Can you explain how the federal government
ensures that its model accurately reflects reality?

you explain

reality

Models making long-term
projections make too many
mistakes.

What do you think are the risks of not making
long-term plans in this crisis?

you think

this

The federal government needs to
make short-term projections and
quickly adapt if circumstances
change.

Can you explain the risks of relying exclusively
on short-term projections in this crisis?

you explain

this

The government cannot know
what is going to happen in the
long term.

What is your understanding of 'long term' in this
crisis?

your understanding

this

If you cannot predict what is going to happen in
the long term, how can you make decisions now
that will only have an impact in the long term?

you make

now/long
term

Have you visited any city recently that may have
struggled with the surge of patients to the public
health system?

you visited

recently

What is your plan for reducing the risk of
transmission in vulnerable localities now?

your plan

now

The main problem with the
projections is that if the numbers
are too alarming, the government
risks increasing the fear and
expectation of society.

The ministry will reveal its own
model within a week for states
and municipalities so they can use
it for benchmark.

The second reporter asks for the
minister's opinion on the
relationships between relaxing
mitigation measures and the risk
of higher infection rates leading to
the collapse of health systems.

Have you recently visited a vulnerable
community to the novel coronavirus?

you visited

recently

What is your plan for the wellbeing of vulnerable
communities in this epidemic?

your plan

this

Why do you think the increase in the number of
infections and surge in demand for hospitals will
not happen at the same time?

you think

will

Can you explain how the number of infections
increases in this crisis?

you explain

this

Can you show when the surge in demand for
hospitals could be expected?

you show

could

Why do you feel so confident about a plan that
has not yet been tested?

you feel

yet

Can you anticipate how many people will die if
your plan does not pan out?

you anticipate

will

The federal government needs
numbers from each region to
provide guidance to each locality.

Can you tell what happens if a region cannot
provide accurate numbers?

you tell

will

There is no magic bullet for this
crisis.

Who do you think is expecting a magic bullet in
this crisis?

you think

this

Are you aware of international best practices that
the federal government can learn from and
partner with in this crisis?

you aware

this

Ideas to address this crisis are not
inherently bad or good but poorly
used or well used.

Can you illustrate this reasoning with some bad
and good examples since the outbreak of this
epidemic?

you illustrate

since

The federal government needs
'wisdom' to use what we have.

Can you be specific about what you understand
by 'wisdom' in this crisis?

you be specific

during

Can you point to the sources of 'wisdom' of the
federal government in managing this crisis?

you point

this

Do you have this so-called 'wisdom' to manage
this crisis?

you have

this

Can you list what the federal government has and
does not have to manage this crisis?

you list

this

Can you explain why there is no mass testing in
the country right now?

you explain

right now

Why do you think mass testing is important in
this crisis?

you think

this

Do you know if there are limitations to mass
testing as a strategy to contain the spread of this
virus?

you know

this

He does not believe that the
increase in the number of
infections and the surge demand
for hospitals will happen at the
same time.

The minister categorically poses
that his job is to ensure that his
plan will work out.

There is no mass testing in the
country.

There is a difference between
population testing and mass
testing.

Can you explain the differences between these
tests and how they help in this crisis?

you explain

this

The sample of tests must reflect
the population.

Can you show how the sample of tests reflect the
population?

you show

reflect

Can you tell when these tests start?

you tell

start

Do you know when the results will be publicly
available?

you know

will

Can you explain how the results of these tests
will inform decision making?

you explain

will

What do you think are the risks in making
decisions only based on the results of these tests?

you think

these

What do you think went wrong in Italy then?

you think

then

Why do you think South Korea did better than
Italy?

you think

did

Are there other countries that you would like to
mention as positive and negative examples in
containing and mitigating the risks of this virus?

you would like

this

Can you point to other lessons that the Brazilian
federal government learned from international
best practices?

you point

international
best practices

Do you mean data analysis? Can you explain the
difference?

you mean

difference

Can you tell who in your team is in charge of
data collection and analysis and why this person
can be trusted?

you tell

in your team

Can you show how these analyses will inform
decision making?

you show

will

Do you know whether there are other indicators
that could help the federal government make
informed decisions in times of uncertainty?

you know

times

What do you think the risks are of waiting for
making decisions only when enough and
accurate data is available?

you think

available

Can you explain how you calculate the trade-offs
of your decisions in this crisis?

you show

this

The third reporter asks the
minister to talk more about mass
testing and the relaxation of social
isolation policies, particularly in
Brasilia.

Can you explain how mass testing informs social
isolation policies expected to be enacted in
Brasilia in the next few days?

you explain

in the next
few days

It is important to closely monitor
(unclear)

Can you tell again what needs to be closely
monitored in this crisis?

you tell

this

Italy 'was a disaster' despite
conducting more mass testing
than South Korea.

The importance
of data interpretation for making
informed decisions.

Decisions based on data will
'make every difference'.

to decide whether the strategy
needs to be reviewed.

Can you explain how this monitoring happens?

you explain

this

Can you tell when this monitoring indicates that
a strategy needs to be reviewed?

you tell

to be

Can you explain how this review process works?

you explain

this

Table 1 shows questions that could be asked based on statements made by the minister and
questions asked by reporters. This list of 'a priori intuition' questions aims to move to the
forefront how the mind of the interviewer organizes and classifies personal experiences, which is
a central premise of Kant's argument. By gaining insights into and exposing how a particular
mind influences thoughts, journalists help the public assess the reliability and validity of
authoritative arguments.

In this discourse analysis, it is observed that reporters have not resorted to this strategy in their
questioning. As for the minister's briefing and his answers, it is unclear the depth of his critical
thinking skills and his ability to lead this crisis. Journalists asking 'personal' questions that had
revealed the minister's ‘a priori intuition’ would have accelerated this assessment and as a result
helped the public evaluate more confidently whether the proposed policies were well thought out
and could be trusted.

Conclusion

Public trust in decision and policy making is particularly important in times of crisis and
uncertainty. People generally look for dependable information and clear guidance on how to act
to reduce the risks of a threat to themselves. Journalists asking questions that expose how public
authorities’ personal experiences determine the organization and classification of their thoughts
contribute in this regard. Straightforward questioning that invokes the notions of space and time
has the ability to showcase the level of thoughtfulness in critical thinking. Readers and viewers
are more likely to make better decisions and comply with ​ad hoc policies if they are exposed

12

with facts that are clearly displayed, contrasted and contextualized . Kant’s epistemology of
transcendental idealism can guide the ‘personalization’ of this inquiry process.

The proposed inquiry process features limitations. First, this 'personalization' may come across
as inappropriate in some instances. Thus it needs to be adapted to cause less friction and allow
the interviewer to obtain critical information while exposing a particular reasoning accordingly.
Second, the interpretation of the work of Kant has been the focus of many debates. Thus this
study understands that there could be alternative interpretations to the way the notions of space
and time were instrumentally proposed in this study. Third, the circumstances under which
authorities and journalists operate are different than those that scholars and scientists are used to.
Thus it is reasonable to expect that not every question can be asked as well as satisfactorily
answered.

Acknowledgement

No conflict of interest to report. No funding to declare.
References
Albarran, A. B. (2008). Media economics. ​The International Encyclopedia of Communication​.
Allison, H. E. (2006). Kant’s transcendental idealism. ​A companion to Kant,​​111424.​
Anspach, N. M., & Carlson, T. N. (2018). What to believe? Social media commentary and belief
in misinformation. ​Political Behavior,​1-22.
Bardoel, J. L. H., & d'Haenens, L. S. J. (2004). Media responsibility and accountability: New
conceptualizations and practices.
1

The new Health Minister has not provided a national guideline that state and local authorities could
agree after more than three weeks have passed since the first public briefing (Rezende, 2020).
2

The new Health Minister quit his position in the federal government on May 15th, 2020, less than a
month after taking office. He left praising social distancing policies enacted by governors and mayors. The
media claims he grew increasingly uncomfortable with the president’s desire to widely use chloroquine as
a treatment to covid-19 (Zylberkan, 2020).

Barnett, S. (2009). ​Journalism, democracy and the public interest.​Reuters Institute for the Study
of Journalism, Department of Politics and International Relations, University of Oxford.
Behnke, E. (2020, April 29). 'Não vão botar no meu colo essa conta', diz Bolsonaro sobre mortes
pelo coronavírus. ​Estadão​. Retrieved from
https://politica.estadao.com.br/noticias/geral,nao-vao-botar-no-meu-colo-essa-conta-diz-bolsonar
o-sobre-mortes-pelo-coronavirus,70003286981
Brandão, V. (2020, April 14). Confundir para dividir: a loucura consciente de Bolsonaro frente
ao coronavírus. ​Observatório da Imprensa​. Retrieved from
http://www.observatoriodaimprensa.com.br/conjuntura-politica/confundir-para-dividir-a-loucura
-consciente-de-bolsonaro-frente-ao-coronavirus/
Brook, A. (2010). Kant's View of the Mind and Consciousness of Self. ​Stanford encyclopedia of
philosophy.​
Caple, H., & Bednarek, M. (2013). Delving into the discourse: Approaches to news values in
journalism studies and beyond.
Congresso Em Foco (2020, April 1). “Gripezinha” e “histeria”: cinco vezes em que Bolsonaro
minimizou o coronavírus. ​UOL.​Retrieved from
https://congressoemfoco.uol.com.br/governo/gripezinha-e-histeria-cinco-vezes-em-que-bolsonar
o-minimizou-o-coronavirus/
Durfee, J. L. (2006). “Social change” and “status quo” framing effects on risk perception: An
exploratory experiment. ​Science Communication,​​27(​4), 459-495.
Ferguson, N., Laydon, D., Nedjati Gilani, G., Imai, N., Ainslie, K., Baguelin, M., ... & Dighe, A.
(2020). Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID19
mortality and healthcare demand. ​Imperial College London​. Retrieved from
https://dsprdpub.cc.ic.ac.uk:8443/handle/10044/1/77482
Fisher, C. (2018). What Is Meant By ‘Trust’In News Media?. In ​Trust in Media and Journalism
(pp. 19-38). Springer VS, Wiesbaden.
Filho, J. (2020, February 23). Bolsonaro se diz perseguido pela imprensa. Mas Band, SBT,
Record e Rede TV estão ao seu lado. ​The Intercept.​Retrieved from
https://theintercept.com/2020/02/23/imprensa-bolsonaro-band-sbt-record-rede-tv/

Folha de S. Paulo (2020, February 27). Bolsonaro elogia CNN Brasil e defende boicote a mídia
'que mente'. ​Folha.​Retrieved from
https://www1.folha.uol.com.br/poder/2020/02/bolsonaro-elogia-cnn-brasil-e-defende-boicote-amidia-que-mente.shtml
Folha de S. Paulo (2020a, April 30). Veja declarações de Bolsonaro minimizando coronavírus
diante de escalada de mortes. ​Folha.​Retrieved from
https://www1.folha.uol.com.br/equilibrioesaude/2020/04/veja-declaracoes-de-bolsonaro-minimiz
ando-coronavirus-diante-de-escalada-de-mortes.shtml
Gomes, W. J. F. (2020, March 31). Jair Bolsonaro e a desinformação a serviço da covid-19.
Observatório da Imprensa.​Retrieved from
http://www.observatoriodaimprensa.com.br/coronavirus/jair-bolsonaro-e-a-desinformacao-a-serv
ico-da-covid-19/
IstoÉ (2020, April 24). Insper: Bolsonaro é líder disfuncional que age contra interesses de quem
o elegeu. ​IstoÉ Dinheiro.​Retrieved from
https://www.istoedinheiro.com.br/insper-bolsonaro-e-lider-disfuncional-que-age-contra-interesse
s-de-quem-o-elegeu/
Janiak, A. (2009). Kant’s views on space and time. ​Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Klayman, J. (1995). Varieties of confirmation bias. ​Psychology of learning and motivation,​​32,​
385-418.
Knobloch-Westerwick, S., & Kleinman, S. B. (2012). Preelection selective exposure:
Confirmation bias versus informational utility. ​Communication Research,​​39(​2), 170-193.
McLaughlin, P., & Schlaudt, O. (2020). Kant’s Antinomies of Pure Reason and the ‘Hexagon of
Predicate Negation’. ​Logica Universalis,​1-17.
McLear, C. (2017). Intuition and presence. In Andrew Stephenson & Anil Gomes (eds.), ​Kant
and the Mind​. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 86-103 (2017).
Merritt, M. M. (2010). Kant on the Transcendental Deduction of Space and Time: an essay on
the philosophical resources of the Transcendental Aesthetic. ​Kantian Review​, ​14​(2), 1-37.

Nisbet, M. C., & Fahy, D. (2015). The need for knowledge-based journalism in politicized
science debates. ​The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science,​​658(​1),
223-234.
O Globo (2020, January 28). A falta de preparo do Brasil para enfrentar o coronavírus e o
embate entre Moro e Bolsonaro. ​Globo.​Retrieved from
https://oglobo.globo.com/podcast/a-falta-de-preparo-do-brasil-para-enfrentar-coronavirus-o-emb
ate-entre-moro-bolsonaro-24216068
Picheta, R.; Siad, A. (2020, May 14). Bolsonaro's March visit with Trump was a 'corona trip,'
says Brazil's former health secretary. ​CNN​. Retrieved from
https://edition.cnn.com/2020/05/13/americas/bolsonaro-us-visit-corona-trip-intl/index.html
Pluviano, S. (2019). On the fallibility of human memory for future actions. ​Edinburgh Research
Archive​. The University of Edinburgh.
Prado, B. (2020). COVID-19 in Brazil:“So what?”. ​TheLancet,​​395(​10235), 1461.
Rezende, C. (2020, March 13). Estados e municípios negam plano de isolamento e Teich cancela
apresentação. ​UOL.​Retrieved from
https://noticias.uol.com.br/colunas/constanca-rezende/2020/05/13/estados-negam-plano-de-isola
mento-do-governo-e-teich-cancela-apresentacao.htm
Ribeiro, M. (2020). Bolsonaro diz que desemprego não pode ser efeito colateral da crise.
Agência O Globo. R
​ etrieved from
https://economia.ig.com.br/2020-03-24/bolsonaro-diz-que-e-preciso-brigar-para-que-desemprego
-nao-seja-efeito-colateral-da-crise.html
Scott, M. (2016). Theoretical Reason: Knowledge and its Limits in Immanuel Kant’s Critique of
Pure Reason. ​Limits​, 23.
Starkey, G. (2006). ​Balance and bias in journalism: Representation, regulation and democracy​.
Palgrave.
Strawson, P. (2018). ​The bounds of sense: An essay on Kant’s critique of pure reason​.
Routledge.
Street, J. (2010). ​Mass media, politics and democracy​. Macmillan International Higher
Education.

UOL (2020, April 22). Novo Ministro da Saúde Nelson Teich Participa Pela Primeira Vez de
Coletiva do Governo Federal. ​UOL.​Retrieved from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R8lkH5XwELM
Van Dalen, A. (2012). Structural bias in cross-national perspective: How political systems and
journalism cultures influence government dominance in the news. ​The International Journal of
Press/Politics​, ​17​(1), 32-55.
van Zoonen, W., & van der Meer, T. (2015). The importance of source and credibility perception
in times of crisis: Crisis communication in a socially mediated era. ​Journal of public relations
research,​​27(​5), 371-388.
Weterman, D. (2020, March 25). ​'Uma gripe qualquer em minha mãe pode ser fatal', diz
Bolsonaro. ​Estadão.​Retrieved from
https://saude.estadao.com.br/noticias/geral,uma-gripe-qualquer-em-minha-mae-pode-ser-fatal-di
z-bolsonaro,70003247391
Williams, A. E. (2012). Trust or bust?: Questioning the relationship between media trust and
news attention. ​Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media​, ​56​(1), 116-131.
Wood, A. W. (2007). Kantian ethics. ​Cambridge University Press.
Zylberkan, M. (2020, May 15). Nelson Teich pede demissão do Ministério da Saúde. ​Veja​.
Retrieved from ​https://veja.abril.com.br/brasil/ministro-nelson-teich-pediu-demissao/​.

