Opinion: All in the name: COVID-19, variants of concern, and the (re)production of difference
Tim Brown
It was just over a year ago that President Trump, speaking in the early phases of an unsuccessful
presidential campaign, referred to COVID-19 as the “Chinese virus”. In attempting to defend this
seemingly harmless geographical framing, the then president remarked that it was not racist because
the virus “comes from China”. Trump was not alone, other political figures within and outside of his
administration adopted a similar approach to labelling the virus according to its assumed place of
origin rather than its then accepted scientific nomenclature (originally labelled ‘2019-nCoV’, the virus
was renamed COVID-19 in February 2020). Most notably, perhaps, the Secretary of State Mike
Pompeo, repeatedly referred to COVID-19 as the “Wuhan virus” in a White House press briefing.
Trump, Pompeo, and others attracted their supporters; for example, in an interview viewed over 4
million times on Twitter, Republican Senator, John Cornyn, stated “China is to blame because the
culture where people eat bats & snakes & dogs & things like that, these viruses are transmitted from
the animal to the people and that’s why China has been the source of a lot of these viruses like SARS,
like MERS, the Swine Flu” (Cornyn 2020. Emphasis added). However, recognizing the harm that such
racialised framings inflict on those identified as belonging to groups or places associated with disease,
the dominant response was one of vilification. Continuing with the political discourse in the USA,
Democratic Representative Ted Lieu, taking a lead from the ‘I Am’ social media campaign that
emerged in response to the stigmatising of Liberian Americans during the West African Ebola outbreak
of 2013-16 (see Brown et al 2017), was reported as stating “I am not a virus… when you say things like
that, it hurts the Asian-American community” (Edmondson 2021).
In labelling the virus in this way, President Trump might be forgiven for believing that he was merely
following established norms. Indeed, even broadsheet newspapers with the kinds of liberal credentials
that Trump quite obviously despises, such as The New York Times in the USA and The Guardian in the
UK, initially reported on the then emerging pandemic under headlines containing similar terminology:
“To understand the Wuhan coronavirus, look to the Epidemic Triangle” (Dan Werb, New York Times,
January 30th 2020) or “China virus: ten cities locked down and Beijing festivities scrapped” (Lily Kuo,
Guardian, January 23rd 2020). Such labelling is a standard trope in what the cultural critic, Patricia
Wald (2008), refers to as the ‘outbreak narrative’. As Wald outlines, epidemiologists play an important
role in the early phases of an epidemic as knowledge of the spaces within which new microbes emerge
and thrive and the routes that they travel, which are carefully mapped as disease outbreaks progress,
are often deployed to frame wider public understanding. Thus, COVID-19 is labelled the ‘Chinese virus’
for much the same reason that SARS was before it, or, further back in history, the cholera epidemics
of the mid-to-late nineteenth century were labelled ‘Asiatic’ cholera and the 1918-20 influenza
pandemic was, and continues to be, referred to as ‘Spanish’ flu. However, such framing practices have
very real social and economic consequences, most especially for the people and places who come to
be associated with disease and embroiled in often wildly inaccurate and speculative explanations for
its emergence. History is replete with examples, although the impact on Haiti and Haitians when it
and they were recorded amongst the “4-H list” of high-risk groups for AIDS (Treichler 1999), or those
countries and peoples associated with SARS (Smith 2006), or on the previously mentioned Liberian
Americans, all serve as recent reminders.
Undoubtedly, it was, in part, for these reasons that the World Health Organization, upon unveiling “CO-V-I-D hyphen one nine – COVID-19” at a press conference on February 11th, 2020, stated the
decision was based upon the principle that the name should not “refer to a geographical location, an
animal, an individual or group of people, and which is pronounceable and related to the disease.”
Speaking as they did in March 2020, Trump, Pompeo, and other politicians and public figures who
followed their lead in employing a geographical label for the virus did so without regard for the wider

social consequences of their pathologising discourse. As is now apparent, these consequences are not
only political or economic ones but also those involving acts of violence in all its various guises, from
everyday acts of discrimination and stigmatisation to verbal and physical assaults. Indeed, the socalled “Coronavirus hate crimes” that Anna Russell reported on for The New Yorker earlier in the
pandemic (Russell 2020), have now been much more systematically evidenced (Li and Nicholson
2021). It is an awareness of the wider context within which such naming practices are embedded that
encouraged this piece about the ongoing use of geographical labels in relation to the COVID-19
pandemic. Here, I shift attention to the emergence of COVID-19 variants, especially those identified
as ‘variants of concern’ (VoCs), and to their subsequent framing. In one sense, we are dealing with the
promissory overload that surrounds 21st century bio-capitalism. The speed with which COVID-19 was
identified as the virus responsible for the current pandemic is certainly evidence of this promise, so
too the global endeavour that has allowed scientists to trace, almost in real time, the emergence and
subsequent spread of potentially more life-threatening variants such as B.1.1.7, B.1.351, B.1.617, and
P.1. However, what of the perils (Carlson 2010)?
Arguably, one of the less-anticipated consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic is the scale of the
‘covid nationalism’ that has accompanied it (Nolan 2021; Woods et al 2020). This has taken a variety
of forms, although it has been especially pronounced in the national discourse surrounding vaccine
development and procurement. Not only have we witnessed the world’s richest nations assert their
economic power to procure the bulk of vaccine doses for their populations – in some instances for
populations that have barely been touched by the pandemic, but more jingoistic forms of nationalism
have emerged in response to the speed of the vaccine approval process, in arguments over the supply
of vaccine doses, as well as in the scale and speed of vaccine implementation. As Florian Bieber (2020)
argues, a pandemic such as the one we are currently experiencing, which threatens the health and
livelihoods of populations living within a nation’s borders and appears as a consequence of
globalisation to have arrived from outside of them, renders this nationalistic perspective more salient.
A critical response has formed in reaction to such examples of vaccine nationalism, one that highlights
the limitations of myopic and inward-looking towards policy that, in the words of the senior advisor
to the Director-General of the WHO, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, will affect the world’s “ability
to control this disease and prevent variants emerging” (Aylward, cited in Eaton 2021). However, much
less has been said about other forms of xenophobic discourse that are prompted by the labelling of
the relatively recently identified ‘variants of concern’. Indeed, the scientific renderings for the Kent
(B.1.1.7), South African (B.1.351), Indian (B.1.617), and Brazilian (P.1) variants have generally been lost
in political and wider public discourse and it is their geographical places of origin that most often
replace them.
Drawing on the concept of ‘medicalized nativism’ fostered by Alan Kraut (1994), Wald reveals how
disease carriers, those conduits of a pandemic who connect “everyone to everyone else,” are fiercely
maligned in such periods of hyper-nationalism (2008: 8). So too the places they inhabit. Such
pathologising discourse is not only used to justify greater regulation and control at and also within a
nation’s borders – as if “national borders can afford protection”, but to exclude, socially as well as
physically, those identified as diseased if they dare to cross them. I finish with this observation not to
denigrate a public health response that demanded a degree of border control (Bashford 2006),
however ineffectually implemented as was the case in England (Ham 2021). Rather, it is to argue that
the same level of care when naming the virus and its variants and reporting on their community spread
needs to be taken at this moment in the pandemic as was exercised in its beginning. If President
Trump’s depiction of COVID-19 as the ‘Chinese Virus’ was racist, why aren’t statements about the
Brazil, Indian, South African, and for that matter the Kent, variants not similarly critiqued?

References
Bashford, A. (2006) Global biopolitics and the history of world health. History of the Human
Sciences 19(1), 67-88.
Bieber, F. (2020) Global nationalism in times of the COVID-19 pandemic. Nationalities
Papers 1-13.
Brown, T., Calkin, S., Holden, K., Reid-Henry, S., Taylor, S. (2021) ‘How to have theory in a
pandemic: Critically reflecting on the discourses of Covid-19’, in Andrews, A., Pearce, J.,
Crooks, V., Messina, J. (Eds) COVID-19 and Similar Futures: Geographical perspectives, issues
and agendas. Springer (forthcoming).
Carlson, R. H. (2010) Biology is Technology. Harvard University Press: Cambridge, Ma.
Cornyn, J (2020) Interview with Senator John Cornyn.
https://twitter.com/thehill/status/1240364608390606850. Accessed 01/05/2021.
Eaton, L. (2021) WHO warns against “vaccine nationalism” or face further virus mutations.
BMJ, 372: n292
Edmonson, C. (2021, March 18) ‘Asian-American Lawmakers Call Out Racist Language: ‘I Am
Not a Virus’’. The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/18/us/politics/asianpoliticians-racism.html. Accessed 01/05/2021.
Ham, C. (2021) Editorial: Covid-19 exposes NHS fault lines in England. BMJ 371: m3922.
Kraut, A.M. (1994). Silent travelers: Germs, genes, and the “immigrant menace.” New York:
Basic Books.
Li, Y., Nicholson Jr, H.L. (2021) When “model minorities” become “yellow peril” — Othering
and the racialization of Asian Americans in the COVID‐19 pandemic. Sociology Compass
15(2), e12849.
Nolan (2021) Coronavirus and the Return of Borders, in C. Dany and A. groppe (Eds)
International Perspectives on Social Polarization and Cohesion in Times of COVID-19.
Working Paper Series of the Peace Academy Rhineland-Palatinate. Universität KoblenzLandau.
Russell, A. (2020, March 17). The rise of coronavirus hate crimes. The New Yorker.
https://www.newyorker.com/news/letter-from-the-uk/the-rise-of-coronavirus-hate-crimes.
Accessed 25 Aug 2020.
Smith, R.D. (2006) Responding to global infectious disease outbreaks: lessons from SARS on
the role of risk perception, communication and management. Social Science & Medicine
63(12), 3113-23.
Woods, E. T., Schertzer, R., Greenfeld, L., Hughes, C., & Miller‐Idriss, C. (2020) COVID‐19,
nationalism, and the politics of crisis: A scholarly exchange. Nations and Nationalism 26(4),
807-825.
Treichler, P.A. (1999). How to have theory in an epidemic: Cultural chronicles of AIDS.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Wald, P. (2008). Contagious: cultures, carriers, and the outbreak narrative. Durham, NC:
Duke University Press.

