Non-peer reviewed SocArXiv preprint

Fake news in the time of environmental disaster: Preparing framework for
COVID-19
Syeda Saadia Azim​1​, Dipayan Dey​2​, Amitava Aich​2​ and Arindam Roy​2*
1​

U.S. Consulate -Kolkata, India

2​

​ South Asian Forum for Environment, Kolkata, India
Abstract
The increasing trend of environmental disaster due to changing climate has escalated the
occurrence of Tsunami, Forest fire, Flood, Epidemics and other extreme health and
environmental and hazardous events across the globe. Establishment of effective and transparent
communication during the crisis phase is extremely important to reduce the after-effects of the
events. In recent times, fake news or news with fabricated content have emerged as major threats
of communications during and and post -disaster phase. The present study critically evaluates the
nature and consequences of fake news spread during the four major environmental disasters in
recent era (Fukushima Nuclear Disaster, Keralan Flood, Amazon Forest Fire and African Ebola
Epidemic) and prepared a framework for present COVID-19 Pandemic. The criticality and
potential threat created by the fake news have been quantified and analyzed through the timeline
of news spreading. It has been observed that the adverse impact related to the African Ebola
Epidemic was highest due to its multiple fake news origin sites, both online and offline
propagation methods, well fabricated content and relatively low effort on containment. However
the COVID-19 pandemic is an ongoing disaster expected to have a long- drawn impact covering
most countries in the world with combined consequences hence it tends to overtake all other
events. Policy recommendations have been prepared to combat the spreading of fake news
during the present and future environmental disasters. The importance of the study relies on the
fact that the number of environmental disasters will increase in future and strategy for risk
communication during the time is still not explored adequately. In addition the study will
contribute significantly for understanding the present status of information paradigm for
COVID-19 and helps in preparing region-specific real-time contingency measures for effective
risk communication.
Keywords: Fake News, Disaster and Crisis Management,
Communications, health and environmental hazards, COVID-19

Extreme Events,

Risk

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------arindam.safe@gmail.com

Non-peer reviewed SocArXiv preprint

Introduction
Disruption of societal functionality or disaster is a consequence of natural or technological
hazards associated with resource loss, environmental degradation, economic damage and health
impact and societal disruptions (Burnham, 2008; Haddow, 2008; Bradley et al. 2016) . An
increasing trend of disaster is observed since the last decades due to the recent change in global
land use, population outburst and climate change (Huppert and Sparks, 2006; Lowrey et al.,
2007; Mayhorn and McLaughlin). The recent IPCC report clearly suggests an increased intensity
of extreme events as a form of drought, floods, forest fire, tsunami and tornados in next several
decades across the globe (IPCC Report 2014). As per multiple recently conducted studies,
change in climate also has also elevated the subsequent increment of viral, bacterial and
protozoan epidemics in different parts of the world (Williams et al., 2016; Pauli et al., 2017) and
pandemics such as COVID-19 as the world is witnessing now. Prevention, preparedness,
response and recovery are the four crucial stages of disaster and proper communication during
the crisis that helps to reduce the impact of the disaster (Bradley et al., 2016). Risk
communication is defined as the process or methods of effectively communicating with people
during the time of exceptional stress or emergency (US EPA, 2018). Previously, risk
communication, especially during disaster, was a one-way channel of information; from
government to the public (Reynolds and Seeger, 2012). However, due to technological
advancement in modern telecommunication, currently interactive mode of risk communication
has been established due to social media, online commentary in news feed and messenger (Glik,
2007) and several other virtual platforms. Harvard Kennedy School on Media, Politics and
Public Policy has quoted “​The Internet has reduced many constraints on dissemination of news.
This allows outlets that do not embody these norms to compete online with those that do on a
relatively more equal footing than was possible offline. This has contributed to the abandonment
of traditional news sources that had long enjoyed high levels of public trust and credibility.​”
(The Science of Fake news, Shorenstein Center, 2018).
The risk communication from government to public has often been found to be inadequate due to
“People might panic”, “People do not need to know'' and “Speculation might increase the unrest”
as suggested by Sandman (2011) and Fischhoff (2011). According to the experts, responsible
circulation of information including the speculative risk and worst case scenario might be
absolutely crucial to avoid misconception among the community (Figueroa, 2013). Fake news
has been identified as a major threat at global perspective and has been able to influence the
presidential election (Shao et al., 2017), disease outbreak (Brainard and Hunter, 2019), hate
crime (Schäfer and Schadauer, 2018) and racism (Shimizu, 2020). At the time of social media
and the internet, the effect of fabricated lies propagated through mimicking news content for
achieving multiple benefits have increased exponentially. Counteracting the emerging trend
requires empowering individuals to detect fake news in the internet and algorithm-based
prevention of fake news spreading by using robust statistical methods and artificial intelligence

Non-peer reviewed SocArXiv preprint

(Garnik and Mesyura, 2017; Lazer et al. 2018). The number of literature connecting the effect of
fake news on disaster is remarkably low. In the present study, we handpicked four environmental
disasters to fill the gap of knowledge on how fake news propagates during different
environmental disasters occurring over different atmospheric environments affecting different
ethnological populations around the globe and then translate the understanding into the present
emerging epidemic outburst.
As the SARS-CoV-2 virus – more popularly known as COVID-19 – has spread around the globe,
conspiracy theories and rumour mongering have also gone viral on social media platforms and
other outlets. World Health Organization Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus
rightly said in February, “​We’re not just fighting an epidemic; we’re fighting an infodemic​”. On
March 27, 2020, the World Health Organization held a media briefing to update the public about
the COVID-19 outbreak. And they made pertinent points cautioning the public on the veracity of
the information they were accessing. They said “​Reacting to raw numbers can be "very, very
unhelpful" and not ensure you understand your country's response effort. Blaming countries with
rising numbers can lead to disincentives to report and test. With no proven treatment, don't
allow misinformation to create drug shortages that can be used to treat other diseases”​ ​. The
objectives of the present study are a) To critically analyze the propagation of fake news during
past and present notable environmental and health disasters, b) To evaluate the impact and
mitigation strategy taken by Government c) To establish a policy framework for combating fake
news during present COVID-19 outbreak and future environmental disaster.
2. Methodology
2.1 Brief description of selected environmental disaster
Fukushima Nuclear power plant was hit by an earthquake followed by a Tsunami on Mar 11,
2011, which led to significant radiation leakage which is considered as the most severe nuclear
disaster after Chernobyl. One and half lakh residents were evacuated immediately and multiple
people were hospitalized due to radiation burns, injuries and one was officially died due to
cancer from the accident. Total financial loss is accounted for $188billions. During mid August
of 2018, heavy monsoonal rainfall followed by dam discharges and landslides have caused
millions of people to evacuate and $400 of property damage. With 480 people dead and 143
people missing, one sixth of the population of Kerala directly affected by the flood. Beginning in
Jan 2019, Amazonian forest fire caused the burning of 9060 sq km of forest. More than 40000
fire counts were estimated from satellite data and this leads to extensive damage in wildlife and
biodiversity. The fire is majorly driven by slash and burn agriculture and prolonged drought
period due to global warming. With a total 11323 world-wide deaths, African Ebola outbreak is
considered as one of the most massive epidemics in recent history. Guinea, Liberia,Mali, Nigeria

Non-peer reviewed SocArXiv preprint

and Sierra Leone were the worst affected countries. 28616 cases were registered with 40% of
fatality rate. In 2018, a second phase outbreak was reported in Congo and Uganda with total
confirmed cases of 3305 and total death count of 2268. ​As regard to COVID1-9 the impact is an
ongoing assessment of social and economic health of people, countries, communities and their
cultures. The corona virus spanning 199 countries has killed more than one lakh fifty thousand
people (as of April 18, 2020) globally until now and the numbers are counting. It is very difficult
at this point to evaluate the larger impact of the pandemic and that caused by the want of risk
communication.
2.2 Review and search methods
The paper has analyzed the previous literature of fake news and environmental disaster through a
series of web portal searches, independent social media analysis and book reviews. Appropriate
keywords have been selected and search was undertaken in Google, Google Scholar, Web of
Science, Pubmed and multiple digital fake news databases (LibGuide, Politico, The Harvard
Kennedy School Misinformation Review, ​Global Media Manipulation Case Book (GMMCB)​).
Newspaper articles, blogs, online news portal, scientific literature, thesis and commentary for
each disaster have been selected for further analysis. The assessments are being done to quantify
the impact of fake news, malinformation and misinformation regarding COVID -19 till mid of
April, 2020.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 General characterization of Fake News
The overall list of fake news propagated as a function of time for four environmental and health
disasters has been given in Fig 1.
3.1.1 Fukushima Nuclear Disaster
Right after the disaster, an overall propaganda stating the failure of nuclear energy was circulated
through social as well as conventional print and audio-visual medium. Two significant
misinformations were spread globally years after the Fukushima incident. i) A radioactive
pollution map depicting Tsunami wave height over Pacific ocean was falsely attributed as
radioactive level in the ocean water (Jacob, 2018). The rumor mostly spread through online news
media portal and was detected as fake content after months. ii) Dramatic rise of thyroid cancer
and leukemia after the nuclear disaster (Sawano et al. 2019). Sadly it was initially circulated by
local city council members through leaflets followed by massive propagation in social media
(Owen, 2019). Months after its circulation in national and international media, a commentary in
a reputed scientific journal proved the content as false and doctored. Another unfair and biased
news was the increase of radiation exposure at an unimaginable level. It was falsely propagated

Non-peer reviewed SocArXiv preprint

on online news mediums along with news of surveillance robots melt-down due to the high
radioactivity level (Middleton, 2017). However, these news items were classified as fake and
debunked at the earliest convenience. Two other news of mutated flowers in the radiation zone
and Alaskan fish getting cancer for the Fukushima disaster went viral in social media and both
conspiracy theories were found to be fake within days of the circulation (Evon, 2015; Funke,
2019)

Fig 1: Fake news along with the time-line for four selected disasters
3.1.2 Kerala Floods
The Kerala floods also brought the flood of misinformation in social media and online news
portal within a very short interval (Saroop and Augustine, 2019). An audio message was
circulated rapidly through whatsapp stating that cracks were detected in Mullaperiyar Dam and
it would burst and kill millions of Keralites (Pravin, 2019). An UK-based news agency also
made the mistake of reporting the same without verification. Government officials had to issue

Non-peer reviewed SocArXiv preprint

an office order to prevent the spreading of the rumours. Another propaganda news went viral on
twitter articulating that Kerala CM stopped Army involvement for rescuing flood victims
(Verbrugge, 2018). A tweet from Indian Army finally debunked the disinformation within hours
of the fake news propagation. Entirely fabricated news of entire state electric shut down and
discriminatory partisan audio clips of Keralite being too rich to receive relief help during flood
emergency circulated on Whatsapp circuits (Sneha, 2018). Satire news as men do not want to
wear a saffron life jacket due to political differences spread on online news portals along with
the pictures of past flood affected zones and sweeping out of animals in flood water (Kundu,
2018). False news of an eleven million dollar donation by Chritiano Ronaldo has also circulated
within a few days of the Kerala flood (LiveMint, 2018).
3.1.3 Amazonian Forest Fire
The fire episodes over Amazon rainforest had started a series of misinformation spread in the
internet. Old photographs of forest fire (Not even Amazonian forest), distressed animals,
firefighters and saved souls were shared by thousands of people including celebrities like
Madonna, Christiano Ronaldo, Leonado de Caprio, Novak djocovik and French Prime Minister
Emmanuel ​Macron (Shellenberger, 2019). Millions of followers of these celebrities also start
sharing these mis-informations on social media sites. Along with pictures, misinformation such
as “Amazon is the lungs of the planets” or “It produces 20% of the earth’s oxygen”, was widely
spread through Twitter, Instagram, Facebook and Whatsapp. A narrative based propaganda was
created where Amazonian fires were portrayed as the first of its kind and exceptionally
devastating in nature. The data was fabricated and it took almost a month to label the whole
narrative as fake news and it was found that Amazon forest fires were very common and higher
frequency was observed compared to 2019 in previous years such as 2016, 2012 and 2010
(Wirtz, 2019). Fake news like the highest rate of deforestation during the forest fires had spread
in the news whereas the truth revealed a lower deforestation rate compared to last decade
(Nepstad, 2019). However, it took a good amount of time before the well furnished partisan
mal-information was detected as fake.
3.1.4 African Ebola Epidemic
The fake news that was spread in the time of African Ebola epidemic were multi-layered,
spontaneous, emotional fabrication of dis-information, mis-information and mal-information. A
part of it was entirely political, where rumors like Ebola being an engineered disease was spread
extensively through Whatsapp (Martin, 2019). Racially influenced news like anti-Ebola
medicines were fake tablets that killed people and the vaccine worked for white people only
spread through social media and word-of-mouth instantaneously (Martin, 2019). “Ebola patients
have risen from death” and “Ebola is an act of terrorism” were also being propagated very fast
through social media and personal communications (Martin, 2019; Spinney, 2020). Denial and

Non-peer reviewed SocArXiv preprint

disbelief spread so much that the treatment centre for Ebola was termed as a death house by the
locals. Mal-information about cures and medicines was also circulated within weeks using
twitter and whatsapp. For example, Ewedu plants or blood transfusion or drinking salt water
could cure ebola (Oyeyemi, 2014). It was also found that there was an intentional effort to
spread a rumor that there was nothing called Ebola (as believed by one in every four citizen in
Congo, the country worst hit by the disease) and that it was a political disease (Vinck et al.
2019). This caused massive unrest in the society and treatment centres were being attacked
around Congo (Sweeney, 2019). Long after the Ebola event, false outbreak news was spread in
Ghana, USA and other parts of the globe (Ghana Health Service, 2018; Wilson, 2019). Major TV
channels and news portals sometimes unintentionally helped to spread that kind of
mis-information. Another misinformation spread in Hyderabad, India, stated the occurrence of
Ebola virus in Softdrinks, spread rapidly through social media (TOI, 2019).
3.2 Classification and threat potential of fake news
Through credible news sources “​Fake news is defined as the information deliberately fabricated
and published with the intention to deceive and mislead others into believing falsehoods or
doubting verifiable facts”​. ​The fake news have been classified as mis-information,
dis-information and mal-information according to Wardle and Derakhshan (2017). In brief,
mis-informations are honest mistakes which do not intend to harm whereas dis-informations are
fabricated narratives created with the intention to harm or influence others. Mal-informations
are right information in the wrong context to initiate hatred against a particular person,
community or organization or piece of information. The percentage contribution of
mis-information, dis-information and mal-information for all four environmental and health
disaster types have been represented in Fig 2. The contribution of mis-information among the
total fake content circulated for four environmental disasters is: Forest Fire (Amazon) > Flood
(Kerala) > Nuclear (Fukushima) > Epidemic (Ebola).
Higher proportion of mis-information during amazon forest fire indicates most of the fake news
were hoax with minor or no adverse consequences. However, a minimal proportion of
mis-information (less than 10%) was observed in the Ebola epidemic spread out which indicates
the majority of the fake news was created to intentionally harm a particular group or community.
Higher fraction of mal-information during Epidemic (Ebola) events clearly suggested that the
spreading of fake information was not at all an act of spontaneous passion but it was a deliberate
attempt to mislead people for political or monetary gain. More than 70% of the fake news
circulated during the Fukushima disaster and Kerala floods were either fabricated or placed
deliberately. The ratio of total information (sum of mis-information, dis-information and
mal-information) to mis-information can be used as an indicator of damaging potential and the
ratio is found to be highest in case of Ebola Epidemic (12) followed by Fukushima nuclear

Non-peer reviewed SocArXiv preprint

disaster (3.5), Kerala Floods (3) and Amazonian forest fire (2). Therefore in this study, the Ebola
epidemic was found to be the most impactful in terms of adverse effects.

Fig 2: Types of fake informations in four environmental disasters
3.3 Fake News and Detection: Timeline and Mitigation
The time point of origin and the time for detection of different types of fake news have been
represented in Table 1 for four environmental and health disasters. It can be observed that the
mis-informations usually originate earlier than dis-information and mal-information. For all four
types of disaster, the detection of mis-information is also very rapid (within hours/days of
origin). In most of the cases, active and concerned social media users help to detect the
mis-information. In some cases, mis-information was detected by online news portals and
established media organizations. However, due to the well fabricated nature of dis-information
and mal-information, the detection usually took higher time (days and months) compared to
mis-information detection. Due to the long-lasting effect of nuclear disaster, the fake news
originated even 7-8 years after the incident. Observations from Kerala Floods indicated the
containment of all types of fake news were done within hours/days of origin. Due to the huge
spatial area, multiple affected sites and extended timeline, fake news related to African Ebola
epidemic also originated on a longer time scale. The most diverse sources of fake news origin

Non-peer reviewed SocArXiv preprint

were observed in African Ebola Epidemic where messenger platforms, social media, print media,
television media and word of mouth; all were involved at some point of time.
Table 1: Origin and detection periods for fake informations
Disaster Name

Information Types

Origin time point
(After the disaster)

Fake detection
(After spreading)

Fukushima
nuclear disaster

Mis-information

Months/Years

Days

Dis/Mal information

Months/Years

Months

Mis-information

Hours/Days

Hours/Days

Dis/Mal information

Days

Days/Weeks

Mis-information

Hours/Days

Days

Dis/Mal information

Days/Weeks

Months

Mis-information

Months/Years

Days

Dis/Mal information

Months/Years

Months

Kerala Flood

Amazon Forest
Fire
Ebola in Africa

Due to the diversity of information and its dissemination, a diverse set of audience controlling or
studying the impact of an infodemic is a very challenging matter.. In the above four cases
community based door-to-door campaign, official notice, performance by local artists, campaign
in radio and television was launched during the time-period. However, it was not very effective
as during later stages an increasing number of supporters of conspiracy theory were observed in
social media. Fake news associated with Kerala Flood and Amazon Forest Fire mostly spread
through Whatsapp and Twitter. Government officials, IT cell and police department worked
together by starting an anti-campaign in social media, releasing government orders, police
reporting against the fake campaigner and arresting them to stop spreading fake news at earliest
convenience. Social media and news portals were associated with fake news circulation after the
Fukushima nuclear disaster and the containment involved government notifications and media
coverage falsifying the hoax.
3.4 Fake news during COVID-19
In case of COVID -19 it was found to be a concoction of mis, dis and mal –information making
the scenario fit for fake news. The spreading of the virus through Bat and Pangolin is one of the
popular misinformation ​that was shared in social media leading to the creation of the big fake
news kit bags. “Corona Virus was infecting only Chinese people because they ate wild animals”

Non-peer reviewed SocArXiv preprint

and “Chinese people stopped eating non–vegetarian food” are the kind of mis-information which
propagate instantaneously in social media. Dis-information and mal-information are spreading
rapidly through internet e.g. the origin of the virus from failed biological experiments; the virus
is a result of genetic modification; Covid-19 can be cured by ingesting fish-tank cleaning
products containing chloroquine; self-medication of Hydroxychloroquine, medicine used to treat
malaria, can prevent the virus; homeopathy medicine and ingestion of bovine excreta can protect
from Coronavirus. Misinformation of several celebrities (Cristiano Ronaldo and Pope) tested as
Corona positive spread during early hours. Fake news on ​Nostradamus prophecies about
Coronavirus in 2020 and conspiracy theories published in books/movies are becoming
widespread instantaneously. Trade war between U.S. and China; shifting of responsibility
towards a particular religion and sending corona-affected terrorists to neighbouring countries are
recent examples of mal-information outspread.
Since little information came out of the highly secretive Chinese government in the initial days
of the virus spread, the dis-information and mal-information scenario preceded the mis
-information scene. And as the epidemic turned to pandemic, and the amount of fear it generated
because of less information, a concoction of mis, dis and mal information along with a mix of
facts kept pouring, leading to an infodemic. The World Health Organization worries that in
fighting the Covid-19 pandemic in the present scenario, they must also combat an infodemic,
which it defines as “an overabundance of information—some accurate and some not—that
makes it hard for people to find trustworthy sources and reliable guidance when they need it.”
P.W. Singer and Emerson T. Brooking in their prescient book ​Like War:The Weaponization of
Social Media,​ (October 2018) write that the United States is engaged on a new battlefield
defined by the “speed, spread, and accessibility of information.”
4. Discussion
The fake news related to the Fukushima disaster does not spread very quickly. The very well
doctored mal-information started spreading years after the incident and created a global impact
escalating fear and disbelief against nuclear power. 70% of the fake news was classified as
“False attribution”, “Misinformation” and “Bogus” which had a serious long-lasting impact on
society, economics and health. Due to the well fabricated nature, the containment of the fake
news took months. In case of Kerala Floods, with minor exception, most of the fake news was
propagated through social media like Twitter, Whatsapp and Facebook (Varghese and
Yadukrishnan, 2019). The propagation began within days of the events and the detection as fake
was completed within hours-to-days time frame. Partisan, error, misinformation and satire are
the major forms of fake news detected. 50% of the fake news could be classified as high impact
as they were motivated by politics and power. However the other 50% could be interpreted as
neutral or low impact form of fake news with minor or no further consequences. The
containment of the fake news was done at a remarkably fast pace due to the fast response from

Non-peer reviewed SocArXiv preprint

the government and civic society which in turn reduced the impact. 32 complaints were lodged
and 5 people were arrested for spreading mis-information (Mathrubhumi, 2018). The majority of
the fake news in Amazon forest fire was classified as harmless misinformations that had no
direct impact. The rest of fake news were mostly politically influenced either making
governments or Amazonians or Soybean cultivation as responsible for the fire events. Although
debatable and suffering from lack of evidence, lots of information was intentionally fabricated
or created during the course of time to establish the conspiracy theories. Sadly, climate change
did not figure even in the first page during the fire episodes. The escalating number of drought
periods and its correlations with forest fires had remained as a little discussed topic in
mainstream and social media. All fake news started within days and the detection got delayed
due to well fabrication. The highly alarming factor in the fake news spreading during African
Ebola epidemic was the proliferation of mis-information via word of mouth which made it much
difficult to contain. The complexity increased due to the political and racial nature of the fake
news (Scrase, 2020). The Red Cross and WHO working in the African continent faced
resistance in the form of verbal abuse, refusal to take medicine and even violence. Clinics were
destroyed and a senior epidemiologist was killed by the protester. The Red Cross tried to gather
information to draw a rumor map and deployed community volunteers to build resistance against
the false rumors. Supernatural theories also arose that related corona with witchcrafts and
demons. The fake news could be classified as “Misinformation”, “Conspiracy theory”,
“Partisan”, “Pseudo-science” and “Propaganda”. All of them had major impacts in the economy,
society and mankind.
In the case of COVId-19, it is still an ongoing assessment process. The evaluation process will be
long drawn due to continued fake and unverified, unscientific claims. But given the impact of the
issue, the Government of India, Ministry of Information and Technology passed an advisory for
users of social media platforms, stating that there was a trend of circulation of
misinformation/false news and sharing of anonymous data in various social media platforms
creating panic among the public”. (letter dated 20.03.2020 , no: 16(1)/2020-CLES) Social media
platforms must inform their users not to host, display, upload, modify, publish, transmit, update
or share any information that may affect public order and unlawful in any way. In the case
CoVID19, most governments had to issue advisories and initiate action for criminal offences
seeing the massive scale of fake information regarding the disease that endangered lives. Chinese
measures to contain the virus in Hubei Province. (Chinese unprecedented strict measures of
complete lockdown in the Wuhan area, stop dissemination of information, controlled information
flow, social media posts of students from Wuhan and the readying of hospitals added more
suspicion than confidence across the globe.
5. Policy Recommendations
1. Transparent clarification and sensible dissemination of information from government
websites/social media pages is extremely important to contain the spread of the fake news.

Non-peer reviewed SocArXiv preprint

Technical terminology needs to be converted into mass language for better understanding.
Proliferation of the information will be done through sensible users in the social medium. 2. The
socio-economic status of the affected region is extremely important as literacy level and
racial/religious/political conflict in the region might elevate the threats from the fake news
spreading. Extra precautionary measures need to be taken for sensitive areas. 3. Fake news
associated with disaster with long lasting health effects like nuclear or toxin spillage can be
propagated years after the incident. Therefore, long-term combat plans with proper monitoring of
data and its reporting is extremely needed. 4. Off-line or word of mouth rumour/hoax can be
more damaging compared to an online counterpart. To prevent off-line fake news community
intervention, door-to-door meetings and usage of conventional communication tools (radio, road
theater) is necessary. 5. Identification of dis-information and mal-information is necessary as
these two are the major harmful components of fake news. Mis-information has little or no effect
in the longer run. 6. Well understanding of Government-Media-Public nexus in the affected
region is useful to design strategy for preventing generation as well as circulation of fake news.
6. Real-time Contingency planning for COVID-19: World's first social media pandemic
It has been found that two important strategies stem the flow and influence of fake news;
empowering people to better evaluate the credibility of news and news sources they encounter;
and bringing structural changes aimed at preventing exposure to fake news in the first place. The
observation during Kerala Flood indicates intervention by the Government and enforcement of
disciplinary action are extremely important for rapid containment of fake news. It was also
observed that the racial and religious sensitivity and inclinations can instigate resistance (African
Ebola); mis-interpretation of scientific data can stimulate propaganda by different lobbies
(Amazon Forest Fire); and mal-informations can be spread years after the disaster took place
(Japan Nuclear Disaster).
COVID-19 is the first ever social media pandemic where the population is relying on social
media feeds more than ever. Though researchers are on the job to ascertain factors to handle the
infodemic, it is now a tested and trial method that seems to work. The world economic forum
recommended three factors to address the infodemic at this point.
1) Relying on evidence based science information: A good science journalist will always
refrain from making comments such as “scientific evidence process that”…so be
skeptical about those claims and embrace uncertainty-responsibly because science itself
is process and sometimes different studies present evidences that can be contradictory
(which is fine)
2) To be mindful of where the information is coming from. If there is breakthrough
discovery then it will definitely be highlighted in all creditable platforms. Alone
whatsapp messages with a certain claim with no evidence to back it should be thought
about deeper.

Non-peer reviewed SocArXiv preprint

3) Who is backing up the claim? During the present scenario of COVID-19 pandemic
there’s been a lot of information with claims such as “I’m not a virologist or
epidemiologist but…” “or this is a preventive medicine and not curative”, so ideally
people should be wary of scientists in unrelated disciplines.
The present study proposes five crucial contingency plans for the current scenario which needs to
be executed rapidly. a) Formation of Govt. portal for divulgence of essential informations
through online and offline/door-to-door methods; b) Preparation of a task-force by the netizen
volunteers for identification and reporting of fake news in social media; c) Presence of multiple
COVID-19 information apps/websites are creating a massive state of confusion and this can be
avoided by formation of central nationwide transparent open sourcing informations
dissemination system; d) The results from the scientific studies regarding COVID-19 are often
misinterpreted and therefore the any scientific study published during the present time of crisis
should consist an executive summary section of mass reader and policy maker; e) Information
gaps/ lack of data should be addressed and a two-way mode of communication with the
government and the people needs to be established through citizen forum.
References
● Ghana Health Service. (2018). Fake News of Ebola In Ghana.
https://www.ghanahealthservice.org/ghs-item-details.php?scid=22&iid=142
● Wilson, R. (2019). ​Ebola outbreak in Africa spreads fake news in America. The Hill. Jun
12.
https://thehill.com/policy/international/448197-ebola-outbreak-in-africa-spreads-fake-ne
ws-in-america
● Spinney L (2020) Why Vaccines Do Not Work Without Trust. Frontier For Young
Minds. 7:160. doi: 10.3389/frym.2019.00160
● Martin, A. (2019). ​Ebola is killing people but rumours about Ebola are killing even more.
Independent. Jun 15.
https://www.independent.co.uk/independentminds/long-reads/fake-news-ebola-outbreakdrc-red-cross-a8956816.html
●

Sweeney, A. (2019). Community Mistrust: why the DRC’s Ebola epidemic is so distinctly complex.
EISF. Jul 9. ​https://www.eisf.eu/news/community-mistrust-why-the-drcs-ebola-epidemic/

● Scrase, A (2020). EBOLA AND FAKE NEWS IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF
THE CONGO. Thesis. Aalborg University, Denmark.
https://projekter.aau.dk/projekter/files/306261282/THESISFINALSCRASE52.pdf
●

Oyeyemi, S. O., Gabarron, E., & Wynn, R. (2014). Ebola, Twitter, and misinformation: a
dangerous combination?. ​Bmj,​ ​349​, g6178.

● TOI. (2019). ​FACT CHECK: Did Hyderabad Police claim soft drinks contain Ebola
virus? Times of India. Jun 4.

Non-peer reviewed SocArXiv preprint

●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●

●

●

https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/times-fact-check/news/fact-check-did-hyderabad-poli
ce-claim-soft-drinks-contain-ebola-virus/articleshow/69650217.cms
Vinck, P., Pham, P. N., Bindu, K. K., Bedford, J., & Nilles, E. J. (2019). Institutional
trust and misinformation in the response to the 2018–19 Ebola outbreak in North Kivu,
DR Congo: a population-based survey. ​The Lancet Infectious Diseases​, ​19​(5), 529-536.
Tsubokura, M., Onoue, Y., Torii, H. A., Suda, S., Mori, K., Nishikawa, Y., ... & Uno, K.
(2018). Twitter use in scientific communication revealed by visualization of information
spreading by influencers within half a year after the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power
plant accident. ​PloS one,​ ​13(​ 9).
Nakayama, C., Sato, O., Sugita, M., Nakayama, T., Kuroda, Y., Orui, M., ... & Rudd, R.
E. (2019). Lingering health-related anxiety about radiation among Fukushima residents as
correlated with media information following the accident at Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear
Power Plant. ​PloS one,​ ​14(​ 5).
Sawano, T., Ozaki, A., Hori, A., & Tsubokura, M. (2019). Combating ‘fake news’ and
social stigma after the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant incident—the importance
of accurate longitudinal clinical data. ​QJM: An International Journal of Medicine,​
112​(7), 479-481.
Jacob, F. (2018). Take hope: This Fukushima disaster map is a fake. Big Think, Oct 18.
(​https://bigthink.com/strange-maps/fake-map-fukushima-disaster-radiation​)
Middleton, J. (2017). Fake News: Fukushima Edition. WUWT, Feb 17.
(​https://wattsupwiththat.com/2017/02/17/fake-news-fukushima-edition/​)
Evon, D. (2015). ​Are Mutated Daisies Growing Near Fukushima? Snopes. July 22.
(​https://www.snopes.com/fact-check/nuclear-mutant-daisies/​)
Fanke, D. (2019). ​A viral post claims fish in Alaska are getting cancer because of
Fukushima.
They
aren't.
Politifact.
Sep
11.
(​https://www.politifact.com/factchecks/2019/sep/11/facebook-posts/viral-post-claims-fish
-alaska-are-getting-cancer-b/​)
Owen, L. H. (2019) Nuclear disasters, information vacuums: How a lack of data in
Fukushima led to the spread of fake health news. NiemanLab. Jul 12.
(​https://www.niemanlab.org/2019/07/nuclear-disasters-information-vacuums-how-a-lackof-data-in-fukushima-led-to-the-spread-of-fake-health-news/​)
Pravin, R. S. (2019). ​In Kerala, fake news floods social media, adds to panic. The Hindu.
Aug 10.
https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/in-kerala-fake-news-floods-social-media
-adds-to-panic/article28965647.ece
Sneha, A. (2018). Kerala Floods: Fake News About 'Dam Burst', 'No Power' Create
Panic. BoomLive. Aug17.
https://www.boomlive.in/kerala-floods-fake-news-about-dam-burst-no-power-create-pani
c/​)

Non-peer reviewed SocArXiv preprint

● Kundu, C. (2018). ​Fact Check: Now fake news floods Kerala. IndiaToday. Aug 20.
https://www.indiatoday.in/fact-check/story/kerala-floods-fake-news-fact-check-13191872018-08-20
● LiveMint (2018). Fake news adds to Kerala flood torment. Aug 12.
https://www.livemint.com/Politics/KLgnO07lu36dnKi2GXk78M/Fake-news-adds-to-Ker
ala-flood-torment.html
● Verbrugge, L. (2018). Fighting Fake News in Kerala. WPMU. Oct 9.
http://wpmu.mah.se/nmict182group2/2018/10/09/fighting-fake-news/
● Mathrubhumi. (2018). ​Fake campaign on social media against flood relief activities: 32
cases registered, 5 arrested. Aug 14.
● https://english.mathrubhumi.com/news/kerala/fake-campaign-on-social-media-against-flo
od-relief-activities-32-cases-registered-5-arrested-1.4041628
● Varghese, R. R. and Yadukrishnan T A, (2019), "Role of social media during Kerala
floods 2018". Library Philosophy and Practice (e-journal). 2754.
https://digitalcommons.unl.edu/libphilprac/2754
● Saroop, KP., & Augustine, R. (2019). FAKE NEWS IN SOCIAL MEDIA: AN
ANALYTICAL STUDY ON KERALA FLOOD. International Journal of Science
Research and Review. Vol 7 (5).
● Wirtz, B. (2019). Data on Amazon Rainforest Fires Tell a Much Different Story Than
Social Media. Foundation for Economic Education. Sep 5.
https://fee.org/articles/data-on-amazon-rainforest-fires-tell-a-much-different-story-than-s
ocial-media/
● Nepstad, B. (2019) ​The myths and the truth about the fires in the Amazon CNN. Sep 5.
https://edition.cnn.com/2019/09/05/opinions/amazon-fires-myths-and-truth-opinion-nepst
ad/index.html
● Shellenberger, M. (2019). ​Why Everything They Say About The Amazon, Including That
It's The 'Lungs Of The World,' Is Wrong, Forbes. Aug 26.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/michaelshellenberger/2019/08/26/why-everything-they-say
-about-the-amazon-including-that-its-the-lungs-of-the-world-is-wrong/#3d0013d25bde
● Wardle, C., & Derakhshan, H. (2017). Information disorder: Toward an interdisciplinary
framework for research and policy making. ​Council of Europe report,​ ​27.​
● Granik, M., & Mesyura, V. (2017, May). Fake news detection using naive Bayes
classifier. In ​2017 IEEE First Ukraine Conference on Electrical and Computer
Engineering (UKRCON)​ (pp. 900-903). IEEE.
● Shimizu, K. (2020). 2019-nCoV, fake news, and racism. ​The Lancet,​ ​395(​ 10225),
685-686.

Non-peer reviewed SocArXiv preprint

● Schäfer, C., & Schadauer, A. (2018). Online fake news, hateful posts against refugees,
and a surge in Xenophobia and hate crimes in Austria. ​Refugee News, Refugee Politics:
Journalism, Public Opinion and Policymaking in Europe,​ 109-116.
● Shao, C., Ciampaglia, G. L., Varol, O., Flammini, A., & Menczer, F. (2017). The spread
of fake news by social bots. ​arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.07592,​ ​96,​ 104.
● Brainard, J., & Hunter, P. R. (2019). Misinformation making a disease outbreak worse:
outcomes compared for influenza, monkeypox, and norovirus. ​Simulation​,
0037549719885021.
● Lazer, D. M., Baum, M. A., Benkler, Y., Berinsky, A. J., Greenhill, K. M., Menczer, F.,
... & Schudson, M. (2018). The science of fake news. ​Science,​ ​359(​ 6380), 1094-1096.
● Paull, S. H., Horton, D. E., Ashfaq, M., Rastogi, D., Kramer, L. D., Diffenbaugh, N. S.,
& Kilpatrick, A. M. (2017). Drought and immunity determine the intensity of West Nile
virus epidemics and climate change impacts. ​Proceedings of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences,​ ​284(​ 1848), 20162078.
● Williams, C. R., Mincham, G., Faddy, H., Viennet, E., Ritchie, S. A., & Harley, D.
(2016). Projections of increased and decreased dengue incidence under climate change.
Epidemiology & Infection,​ ​144(​ 14), 3091-3100.
● US- EPA. (2018) ​https://www.epa.gov/risk/risk-communication
● Burnham GM. Chapter 1: Disaster Definitions. In: Burnham GM & Rand EC, editor(s).
The Johns Hopkins and Red Cross and Red Crescent Public health guide in emergencies.
Second edition. Geneva: International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies, 2008.
● Haddow KS, Haddow G. Disaster communications in a changing media world.
Butterworth-Heinemann, 2008
● Bradley, D. T., McFarland, M., & Clarke, M. (2016). The effectiveness of disaster risk
communication: a systematic review of intervention studies. In ​Effective Communication
During Disasters​ (pp. 81-120). Apple Academic Press.
● Reynolds BS, Seeger MW. Crisis and Emergency Risk Communication. Atlanta. 2012
● Glik DC. Risk communication for public health emergencies. Annu Rev Public Health.
2007;28:33-54. PubMed PMID:17222081. [​PubMed​]
● Mayhorn, C. B., & McLaughlin, A. C. (2014). Warning the world of extreme events: A
global perspective on risk communication for natural and technological disaster. ​Safety
science​, ​61​, 43-50.
● Lowrey, W., Evans, W., Gower, K.K., Robinson, J.A., Ginter, P.M., McCormick, L.C.,
Abdolrasulnia, M., 2007. Effective media communication of disasters: pressing problems
and recommendations. BMC Public Health 97 (7), 1–8.
● Huppert, H.E., Sparks, R.S.J., 2006. Extreme natural hazards: population growth,
globalization, and environmental change. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society, Series A 364, 1875–1888.

Non-peer reviewed SocArXiv preprint

● Figueroa, P. M. (2013). Risk communication surrounding the Fukushima nuclear disaster:
an anthropological approach. ​Asia Europe Journal,​ ​11(​ 1), 53-64.
● Fischhoff B (2011) The emotions of nuclear experts. Retrieved February 20, 2012, from
http://www.thebulletin.org/ web-edition/features/the-emotions-of-nuclear-experts
● Sandman P (2011) Interview on The Futurist. Retrieved February, 20, 2012 from
http://www.wfs.org/content/futurist-interviews-crisis-communications-expert-peter-sand
man-fukushima-daiichi-nuclear-mel

