Rodela et al. (2020)

Economic Impacts of COVID-19: Working Paper Series

Economic Impacts of Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) in Developing Countries
Tahmina Tasnim Rodela,1 Samia Tasnim,2 Hoimonty Mazumber,3 Farah Faizah,4
Abida Sultana,5 Md Mahbub Hossain*21

ABSTRACT
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has critically impacted global health systems and
economies, especially in developing countries. Those countries have been struggling to address
the preexisting burden of diseases with limited resources, which will become even more
challenging during COVID-19. The economic implications related to COVID-19 in those
countries include a high cost of care, market failures in pluralistic health systems, high out-ofpocket expenses, the added burden of noncommunicable diseases, missed economic opportunities,
and socioeconomic consequences like unemployment and poverty. It is essential to assess the
prevalent gaps, mobilize resources, strengthen health systems financing and leadership, enhance
research capacities informing evidence-based policymaking, and foster effective partnerships for
addressing health and economic disparities due to COVID-19.

Keywords: Coronavirus; COVID-19; Communicable Diseases; Developing Countries; Health Economics

1

Mawlana Bhashani Science and Technology University, Tangail 1902, Bangladesh.
School of Public Health, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA.
3
Ipas Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
4
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh.
5
Gazi Medical College, Khulna 09000, Bangladesh.
*Correspondence at: mhossain@tamu.edu
2

1

Rodela et al. (2020)

Economic Impacts of COVID-19: Working Paper Series

Introduction
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is one of the major global health events in the
twenty-first century, which has affected almost every nation globally [1]. Since December
2019, this outbreak caused by a novel coronavirus was found to be structurally related to
the viruses that caused severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and the Middle East
respiratory syndrome (MERS) [1]. During 2002-03, a total of 8,098 cases of SARS were
identified, of these 774 died [2]. The later outbreak by MERS infected 2,494 individuals,
among which 858 died since 2012 [3]. However, COVID-19 has clearly exceeded the
earlier outbreaks of coronaviruses. As of April 2, 2020, more than a million people from
181 countries are identified as COVID-19 cases, and more than 52,900 deaths are reported
due to the disease [4].
With a growing incidence and case fatality attributable to COVID-19, health systems
around the world are experiencing critical challenges in terms of preventing disease
transmission, diagnosing new cases, providing care, and ensuring recovery [5]. These
challenges have heavily impacted many nations with high income and well-structured
health infrastructure, which informs how critically it may impact developing countries,
which have fragmented health systems with poor population health outcomes [6]. The
growing burden of COVID-19 necessitates an understanding of economic implications in
the contexts of developing countries to inform effective policymaking and practice during
this pandemic.

Economic challenges for the health systems in the developing countries
Historically, developing countries have suboptimal diagnostic capacities [7], which may
have resulted in a low number of COVID-19 cases during the earlier stages of this global
outbreak. However, a delayed diagnosis of COVID-19 may lead to hospitalization with a
need for critical care support [8]. Such tertiary-level services would cost higher than
preventing the disease at earlier stages. It is noteworthy that most healthcare organizations
2

Rodela et al. (2020)

Economic Impacts of COVID-19: Working Paper Series

in developing countries lack critical care services, which implies that the increased demand
for intensive care units or ventilators to stabilize COVID-19 patients may remain unmet.
In developing countries with a lack of universal health coverage, where the market plays a
dominant role, the cost of care would also depend on the elasticity of health services and
commodities in those contexts [9]. Such economic failures may happen for diverse health
services during managing COVID-19 in institutional settings. Moreover, continued
shifting of health workforce and resources will create critical distributive issues as patients
with other health problems may not receive their designated services during this pandemic.
Therefore, health systems in LMICs that are often under-resourced and over-burdened are
likely to incur a high cost of care and associated economic failures while addressing
COVID-19.
Another major economic challenge during COVID-19 would be a high out-of-pocket
(OOP) expenditure in developing countries. Most of those nations healthcare organizations
operate within pluralistic health systems incurring OOP for health services [10]. This
economic burden is likely to increase during COVID-19 unless state-sponsored diagnostic
and therapeutic financing is made available. An increased OOP is associated with
subsequent poverty, unemployment, and other socioeconomic consequences, which may
affect individuals and populations in the post-COVID-19 era.
Furthermore, many developing countries already have a high burden of comorbid
noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) [11], which may increase the hospitalization and
mortality across populations while cooccurring with COVID-19. From an economic
perspective, such adverse health outcomes will affect the economic returns on existing and
newly adopted strategies of health systems financing. In addition, many people with NCDs
may experience restricted mobility due to lockdown or lack of transportation, which will
affect their access to health services during COVID-19 [12].
The economic consequences of such missed health opportunities will affect developing
countries, whereas people living in quarantine or lockdown will have an added risk of
3

Rodela et al. (2020)

Economic Impacts of COVID-19: Working Paper Series

developing NCDs, which may have prolonged economic implications for respective health
systems. Other economic challenges associated with COVID-19 in developing countries
may include but not limit into lost wages and insurance benefits of hospitalized individuals,
suboptimal use of health services which could have been generated institutional and
societal benefits otherwise, and disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) attributable to
COVID-19 in those countries [13].

Recommendations for health policymaking and practice
These implications should be acknowledged across developing countries to address the
ongoing and forthcoming economic challenges. As the determinants of health economics
would be different for each context, the developing countries should devise rapid
situational assessment to understand potential economic issues associated with COVID19. Since most of those countries have a poor allocation of resources for health, it is
essential to evaluate the available resources and mobilize the same ensure ensuring costefficiency. Perhaps, balancing between preventive measures and establishing low-cost
tertiary management may alleviate the burden of COVID-19 with a minimal economic
burden.
Further, it is necessary to strengthen the primary care and referral services so that
population health can be served without disrupting existing models of delivering health
services. In addition, special attention should be given to elderly adults and other
vulnerable groups addressing the specific health needs of those populations [12]. In
addition, telemedicine services can be used to ensure appropriate health communication on
COVID-19 [14]. However, such approaches may need advanced infrastructure, which may
not be readily available in developing countries. Therefore, it would be essential to use the
existing resources and develop innovative strategies that can provide cost-effective health
services without affecting the ever-shrinking economy during COVID-19.

4

Rodela et al. (2020)

Economic Impacts of COVID-19: Working Paper Series

Economic challenges often lead to socioeconomic disparities, which should be analyzed
from health and social perspective. Developing countries may adopt policies and programs
to minimize health disparities and their consequences, which would necessitate strong
leadership efforts at institutional and national levels. It would be difficult to address
structural barriers without such efforts with a long-term vision. Despite the scarcity of
resources, many developing countries have shown promising success in addressing
population health problems in the past, which highlight the role of public health leadership.
Nonetheless, the severity of public health emergencies may need collaborative efforts
among different agencies, which may allow them to utilize shared resources and maximize
health and socioeconomic benefits following such collaborations. Large scale outbreaks
like COVID-19 may impact the psychosocial wellbeing among populations, which would
be hard to measure and manage, especially in developing contexts. Therefore, health and
economic research should be prioritized in those countries with regional and global
collaborations [15]. Furthermore, a lack of context-specific evidence may affect the
development and implementation of health and economic policies. This gap informs a need
for enhancing research capacities in developing countries for preventing upcoming crises
and building resiliency across health systems in those.

Conclusion
COVID-19 is affecting global populations indiscriminately; however, the burden of disease
and economic consequences can be much greater, potentially under-reported, and underestimated in the developing countries who share a major proportion of the global burden
of diseases without adequate preparedness in their health systems. This gap between health
problems and abilities to address the same is common across those contexts resulting in
adverse economic impacts in a vicious way. Such widespread disparities necessitate
multilevel policies and context-specific strategic approaches, ensuring optimal care in
COVID-19 minimizing economic challenges in the developing countries.

5

Rodela et al. (2020)

Economic Impacts of COVID-19: Working Paper Series

Conflicts of interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interests.
Funding: No funding was received at any stage of preparing this manuscript.
Acknowledgement: None.
References
1.

Yang P, Wang X. COVID-19: a new challenge for human beings. Cell Mol
Immunol [Internet]. 2020 Mar 31 [cited 2020 Apr 3];1–3. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32235915

2.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. SARS Basics Factsheet [Internet].
2017 [cited 2020 Apr 3]. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/sars/about/fssars.html

3.

World Health Organization (WHO). Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(MERS-CoV) [Internet]. [cited 2020 Mar 2]. Available from:
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/middle-east-respiratorysyndrome-coronavirus-(mers-cov)

4.

Johns Hopkins University. COVID-19 Map - Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource
Center [Internet]. [cited 2020 Apr 4]. Available from:
https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html

5.

Legido-Quigley H, Asgari N, Teo YY, Leung GM, Oshitani H, Fukuda K, et al.
Are high-performing health systems resilient against the COVID-19 epidemic?
Vol. 395, The Lancet. Lancet Publishing Group; 2020. p. 848–50.

6.

Paintsil E. COVID-19 threatens health systems in sub-Saharan Africa: the eye of
the crocodile. J Clin Invest [Internet]. 2020 Mar 30 [cited 2020 Apr 4]; Available
from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32224550

7.

McNerney R. Diagnostics for Developing Countries. Diagnostics [Internet]. 2015
May 19 [cited 2020 Apr 4];5(2):200–9. Available from:
http://www.mdpi.com/2075-4418/5/2/200
6

Rodela et al. (2020)

8.

Economic Impacts of COVID-19: Working Paper Series

Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, Wang X, Zhou L, Tong Y, et al. Early Transmission
Dynamics in Wuhan, China, of Novel Coronavirus–Infected Pneumonia. N Engl J
Med. 2020 Jan 29;

9.

Bloom G, Katsuma Y, Rao KD, Makimoto S, Yin JDC, Leung GM. Next steps
towards universal health coverage call for global leadership. BMJ. 2019 May
24;365.

10.

Onah MN, Govender V. Out-of-Pocket Payments, Health Care Access and
Utilisation in South-Eastern Nigeria: A Gender Perspective. Molyneux S, editor.
PLoS One [Internet]. 2014 Apr 11 [cited 2020 Apr 4];9(4):e93887. Available from:
https://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0093887

11.

Boutayeb A, Boutayeb S. The burden of non communicable diseases in developing
countries. Int J Equity Health. 2005 Jan 14;4(1).

12.

Mazumder H, Hossain MM, Das A. Geriatric Care during Public Health
Emergencies: Lessons Learned from Novel Corona Virus Disease (COVID-19)
Pandemic. J Gerontol Soc Work [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2020 Apr 1];1–2. Available
from: https://doi.org/10.1080/01634372.2020.1746723

13.

Economics in the Time of Covid-19 | VOX, CEPR Policy Portal [Internet]. [cited
2020 Apr 4]. Available from: https://voxeu.org/debates/economics-time-covid-19

14.

Tasnim S, Mazumder H, Hossain MM. Impact of rumors or misinformation on
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in social media [Internet]. SocArXiv. 2020 [cited
2020 Apr 4]. Available from: https://osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/uf3zn/

15.

Hossain MM. Current Status of Global Research on Novel Coronavirus Disease
(COVID-19): A Bibliometric Analysis and Knowledge Mapping. SSRN Electron J
[Internet]. 2020 Mar 3 [cited 2020 Mar 8]; Available from:
https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=3547824

7

