Letter

COVID-19, online teaching, and
deepening digital divide in India
Swasti Vardhan Mishra
swastivardhanmishra@gmail.com
Doctoral Candidate
Department of Geography,
University of Calcutta
&
Guest faculty,
Department of Geography,
West Bengal State University, Kolkata
&
Guest faculty,
Department of Geography,
Rabindra Bharati University, Kolkata

Online teaching is a new buzzword in academics in times of recent pandemic. The higher
education departments and bodies in India have been continuously advising on the intense
use of technology for educating as the need of the hour and seemingly the best possible
alternative for interminable education. This is a good gesture and reflects on the seriousness
the teachers and the administration give in the pursuit of knowledge. But, I would differ on a
point that in a digitally divided country like India such impulses may escalate the divide
further.
The mobile phone has emerged as an important personal asset in the last decade because of
its ability to realise multitudinous possibilities. Evidentially, such a proposition can never be
refuted. India, as of September 2019, had 1,173.75 million wireless subscribers. And, wireless
teledensity has increased from 88.50 in June 2019 to 88.90 in September 2019 registering
0.45% quarterly growth rate. On top of that, the number of smartphone users crossed 500
Million marks in December 2019. Being a part of the teacher and researchers group from
across disciplines, we have not only met suggestions on a large swath of dedicated software
and applications but also observed the keenness with which a student’s materiality
(possession of mobile phones) is taken note of. However, the regular discussions on the
materiality of smartphone possession as the new mantra to bridge the digital divide in India
failed to take note of its spatial and infrastructural dimensions in times of crisis.

Letter

India’s digital divide and its precipitation into the rural-urban divide have a long history that
seemed to have been bridged to an extent by The third-generation (3G), fourth-generation
(4G) broadband wireless access (BWA), and federal policies like Digital India (Nedungadi et
al., 2018). However, spatially the connectivity is seldom uniform - places which are far from
or at some height from the mean sea level from main urban centres have been facing the
network outage issue all the yearlong (Mishra et al., 2019; Nandi et al., 2016). Our recent trips
to Kalimpong (a hill city and district headquarters in the eastern Himalayas) and outskirts of
Bhubaneswar (the capital city of Odisha, an Indian state) for academic reasons pinpointed the
ensuing digital divide – in terms of infrastructure when the team was without internet for a
couple of days but also in terms of geography where fringe settlements are kept out of the
loop for whatsoever reason. India’s education system is predominantly urban (Mahadev &
Kumaran, 1988) that draws students from large peri-urban and rural hinterland. In the wake
of the pandemic when most of the students are home, away from urban areas, a
disproportionate internet service intensifies the divide beyond proportion. In times of
internet’s universal failure on giving up to the promise, such far-flung areas have the least
connectivity of the internet and making futile attempts for its restoration often lands students
in disorder and mental agony. Even if they somehow connect to the lectures, the intermittent
network outages and breaks prevent the actual intention of the act from fructification. Taking
classes for those who can only attend but seldom participate for the sake of mandatory
presence as part of university curricula does more harm than good.
Secondly, the Cellular Operators Association of India (COAI) had warned about a breakdown
in mobile services during the COVID-19 crisis in India (Khatri, 2020), which means that the
digital-divide would deepen further. As a matter of fact, the mean fixed broadband speed in
the country dropped from 41.48 Mbps in January 2020 to 35.98 Mbps in March 2020 (Khatri,
2020). Therefore, the central areas that were once having good connectivity are now suffering
from slow and dead internet. And, the far-flung areas will suffer more from the infrastructural
lacunae. Thus, our attempts at assembling students on a dedicated platform from different
corners would evidently suffer more from network congestion and breakdowns. This would
land the whole exercise in jeopardy.
The spatial and infrastructural divide that turns the digital divide deeper, any attempt to bring
students into these ruptured spaces may bring more disorder and bring far-reaching negative

Letter

externalities. First, the failed attempts of a student to join online classes deprive her/his of
parity vis-à-vis students having relatively better access to the internet. Secondly, coupled with
the multiple apprehensions, this deprivation would add to her/his collapsing mental health.
Thus, in times of a crisis that has weakened us psychologically, it is pertinent that we save
ourselves from deepening the already existing digital divide.
References
Khatri, B. (2020, April 13). COAI Warns Of Mobile Services, Internet Interruption In Covid-19
Hotspots. Inc42 Media. https://inc42.com/buzz/coai-warns-of-mobile-servicesinternet-interruption-in-covid-19-hotspots
Mahadev, P. D., & Kumaran, T. V. (1988). Indian Universities and the Urban Environment. In
F. Lazin, S. Aroni, & Yehuda Gradus (Eds.), The Policy Impact of Universities in
Developing Regions (pp. 73–85). Palgrave Macmillan.
Mishra, A., Appadurai, A. N., Choudhury, D., Regmi, B. R., Kelkar, U., Alam, M., Chaudhary,
P., Mu, S. S., Ahmed, A. U., Lotia, H., Fu, C., Namgyel, T., & Sharma, U. (2019).
Adaptation to Climate Change in the Hindu Kush Himalaya: Stronger Action Urgently
Needed. In P. Wester, A. Mishra, A. Mukherji, & A. B. Shrestha (Eds.), The Hindu Kush
Himalaya Assessment: Mountains, Climate Change, Sustainability and People (pp.
457–490). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-31992288-1_13
Nandi, S., Thota, S., Nag, A., Divyasukhananda, S., Goswami, P., Aravindakshan, A.,
Rodriguez, R., & Mukherjee, B. (2016). Computing for rural empowerment: enabled
by last-mile telecommunications. IEEE Communications Magazine, 54(6), 102–109.
https://doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2016.7498095
Nedungadi, P. P., Menon Rajani, Gutjahr Georg, Erickson Lynnea, & Raman Raghu. (2018).
Towards an inclusive digital literacy framework for digital India. Education + Training,
60(6), 516–528. https://doi.org/10.1108/ET-03-2018-0061

