Solidarities, Fairness, and Economic Governance in Advanced
Capitalism:
The Cases of COVID-19 Responses in Germany and the United States
Mark I. Vail
Worrell Chair of Politics and International
Affairs
Department of Political Science, University of Department of Politics and International Affairs
Wake Forest University, USA
Duisburg-Essen, Germany
Achim Goerres
Professor of Empirical Political Science

E-mail: Achim.Goerres@uni-due.de
www.achimgoerres.de

E-mail: vailm@wfu.edu
www.mivail.com

Paper to be presented at the 27th annual International Conference of Europeanists (virtual), 2125 June 2021. This version: 16 June 2021.
Abstract: This paper addresses the theoretical question of how competing models of social and
economic solidarity shape patterns of economic governance in periods of economic crisis. Using
the COVID-19 pandemic as a signal case, we seek to understand how changes in public opinion
in response to similar social and economic shocks are informed by deeper ideational structures
among citizens relating to their capacity for empathy, mutual support, and willingness to support
and trust public policy interventions. Drawing on scholarly literatures related to moral economies
and the social embeddedness of economic relationships, we undertake an empirical study of how
the COVID-19 pandemic has shaped patterns of support for social and economic policies. We
focus on Germany and the United States, countries with widely divergent modes of integration
of capitalist markets and, therefore, potentially different levels of support for particular kinds of
policy responses. We trace American and German policy responses since March 2020 across a
number of domains, complemented by a systematic analysis of public opinion in the two
countries, drawing from fifteen different sources of public-opinion data, in order to assess the
pandemic’s effects on public support for individualized and collectively-oriented policy
responses.
Equal authors listed in alphabetical order. Both authors would like to thank Manuel Diaz Garcia for
research assistance and the libraries of Tulane University and Wake Forest University for providing access
to the Roper Archive and Gallup Analytics. AG would like to thank the European Research Council for
funding this paper through the project POLITSOLID “Political Solidarities” accessible at
https://bit.ly/politsolid

1

How do competing models of social and economic solidarity and conceptions of economic
fairness, in both elite and public opinion, shape public support for particular policy responses to
periods of social and economic crisis? It is a truism that the COVID-19 pandemic has laid bare the
limitations of models of economic governance across the advanced industrial world, exposing
gaps in national systems of social protection (including monetary support and health and
childcare services), the vulnerabilities of global supply chains and associated production models,
and over-reliance on social benefits derived from labor-market relationships, and, in some
countries, the effects of decades of underinvestment in educational and vocational-training
systems. In so doing, it has both exposed and exacerbated glaring social and economic
inequalities, leading some to characterize our era as a “new gilded age” (Pan 2020), in which
accelerating accumulations of wealth and the top of the income distribution curve highlight the
desperation of a growing underclass that enjoys neither stable employment, nor the luxury of
remote work, nor significant savings enabling them to bridge the gap between jobs. In this sense,
COVID-19 has merely brought into stark relief disquieting trends that long predate it,
heightening the contradictions of late capitalism and discredited the long-held neoliberal
nostrum that limited states and an expansive scope for market forces allow all boats to rise with
the economic tide. Accordingly, it suggests with renewed urgency the need to rethink
assumptions about economic governance inherited from the period of neoclassical consensus
predating the 2008 financial crisis, while also revisiting the question of social solidarities as both
reflections of conceptions of fairness starkly at odds with the world of atomized, rational, and
procedurally equal individuals central to the neoclassical world view.1 Relatedly, the dire
epidemiological and economic circumstances of the past eighteen months suggest a context
within which new conceptions of economic citizenship may emerge, with changing
understandings of mutual dependence among workers and the socially embedded character of
work related to new sets of expectations and norms with respect to state involvement in the
economy.
Our central research question is how periods of economic crisis reshape public
understandings of economic and social solidarity and models of economic governance in
advanced democracies. Using the COVID-19 pandemic as a signal case, we seek to understand
how the acute uncertainties occasioned by the pandemic have highlighted and perhaps reinforced
workers’ capacity for empathy, mutual support, and willingness to sacrifice personal short-term
interests for the sake of broader economic communities of which they are a part. Put somewhat
differently, we hope to gain understanding of the extent to which private calculations of economic
interests become embedded in, or even subsumed by, conceptions of common weal or shared
public purpose. In this context, our analytical point of departure is that the economic trauma and
social dislocation wrought by the pandemic have reshaped not only citizens’ sense of
interconnectedness and mutual dependence, but also the shared sense of public purpose of which
the state is both the chief representative and the primary architect. In framing the question in this
way, we draw implicit analogies with other kinds of national trauma, such as wars, which have
historically transformed both patterns of social solidarity and trust and support for an expansion
of government’s role beyond the military arena, such as in the case of the creation of a

For one compelling treatment of the discrediting of the neoliberal model and its replacement with a much
more robust conception of economic governance, see (Fligstein and Vogel, 2020).

1

2

comprehensive British welfare state in the aftermath of World War II.2 In the context of COVID19, we investigate the extent to which the pandemic has fostered support for particular kinds of
public policy interventions designed to sustain the economy and preserve the social fabric, and
how these patterns of support, and the policy changes that they have underlain, vary crossnationally.
For the purposes of this paper, we focus on Germany and the United States, countries
with widely divergent modes of integration of capitalist markets, differential levels of state
capacity, distinctive systems of social protection, and starkly different industrial-relations
institutions and relationships between capital and labor. Given these differences in traditions,
prevailing norms, and institutions, we expect divergent patterns of social solidarities in the wake
of the pandemic and, partially as a result, different policy responses and elite strategies for
managing the crisis. We trace American and German policy responses since March 2020 (as well
as EU policies that German elites have helped to craft), across a number of policy domains,
including social protection (including job- and wage-protection schemes and transfer payments),
financial assistance to firms, tax breaks for individuals and families, and macroeconomic
interventions in fiscal policy, such as fiscal-stimulus initiatives. In our efforts to explain divergent
outcomes in these areas, we also undertake systematic analysis of public opinion in Germany and
the US about such initiatives and broader questions of fairness and solidarity, seeking to
determine the extent to which German and American workers express a willingness for shared
sacrifice and view their destinies as socially embedded and linked, or rather as atomized and
individualistic. In so doing, we seek to connect societal capacities for solidarities to support for
particular kinds of social and economic policies, thereby connecting the hypothesized German
and American moral economies to the two countries’ disparate policy trajectories.
While German and American policy responses have shared important elements, such as
support for small business and credits for families with children, we argue that differing
conceptions of public purpose, stemming from different levels of political trust and social
cohesion, have led to distinctive patterns of public support for both government action in general
and specific policy responses in particular. In both the US and Germany, the emotional trauma
wrought by the pandemic, and public yearning for effective national responses, led to a marked
increase in public trust of government and public officials. But the kinds of policies supported by
the public varied significantly with levels of economic embeddedness and the degree of
institutionalization of economic relationships. In the US, where such relationships are much more
disembedded, public and elite support has coalesced behind particularistic benefits aimed at
individuals and affected firms, and broad patterns of social trust and cohesion have been
undermined by ideological battles over the appropriate role for the state. In Germany, by contrast,
both the public and governing elites have tended to favor policy instruments that support
strategically important groups in the political economy, such as skilled labor and firms in exportintensive industries, supported by a more developed conception of social purpose and mutual
reliance.
In the next section of the paper, we develop our theoretical framework, which synthesizes
sociological and historical conceptions of capitalism with “moral economy” approaches to
understanding prevailing views of fairness and associated patterns of public opinion and support
for state action in response to crises. We then provide a brief overview of German and American

As we discuss below, we also consider the extent to which reactions to the current pandemic can be
compared to other similar contexts, such as the Spanish influenza pandemic of 1918-1919.

2

3

policy responses to the pandemic, highlighting characteristic differences that, we contend,
emerge from distinctive patterns of public opinion and associated conceptions of public purpose
and state action. We then present our empirical data, connecting patterns of public opinion in the
two countries to levels of social trust and support for particular types of policy interventions. We
end with a brief conclusion in which we explore the theoretical significance of our findings and
speculate about their implications for other historical periods of national trauma such as wars
and other pandemics.

Literature Review and Theoretical Framework
Our paper investigates public and élite support for distinctive sets of social and economic policies
in in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic in Germany and the United States. This
epidemiological and economic shock was, in equal measure, a social and political one,
devastating advanced industrial economies and unsettling established paradigms and
conventional wisdoms about the structural and desirable relationship between the state and the
market in advanced capitalist societies.
In some respects, the trauma of COVID-19 paralleled that of the great influenza of 19181920, with 50-100 million dead worldwide and a disproportionately large impact in Europe. For
instance, between September and November 1918, one million American troops fell ill in France
(Martini et al. 2019). As across much of the world, the pandemic created social, economic and
political challenges of a magnitude rarely seen in Germany and the United States. Given the early
roots of the welfare state in Germany and the embryonic welfare structures in place at the time
in the United States, a comparison between German and American reactions to the earlier
pandemic and to COVID-19 initially seems a promising avenue for assessing the responses of
different arrays of social and economic institutions to pandemics. However, two problems make
it difficult to apply lessons from the earlier episode: in both countries, the influenza pandemic
happened simultaneously with the end of World War I. It is thus very difficult to differentiate
between dynamics that originated in the war and its immediate consequences of the influenza
pandemic. Moreover, at that time, Germany experienced a paradigmatic change of political
institutions, from a semi-democratic, authoritarian monarchy to a modern liberal, presidential
democracy under the Weimar Republic. Furthermore, the influenza and its dramatic
consequences were heavily censored in Germany and to a lesser extent in the US (Barry 2004).
This not only makes it difficult to analyze the social and political reactions of the earlier pandemic,
it also means that one of the causal chains that we assume for our two cases in 2020-21, namely
citizens’ reactions to information spread by the media, are quite difficult to assess in the earlier
period.
Similarities to other pandemics notwithstanding, therefore, COVID-19 is to an important
extent sui generis. The disruption to conventional assumptions about the structure and dynamics
of capitalist political economies that it has occasioned presents an opportunity for researchers to
analyze two sets of inter-related phenomena, both of which are partially constitutive of evolving
conceptions of economic fairness: first, public support for social and economic policies designed
to buffer workers from the effects of the shock and, by implication, for government more
generally; and, second, norms relating to social solidarity and mutual support among citizens.
Our theoretical point of departure is that the degree of social cohesion, involving horizontal
bonds among citizens, shapes the character of citizens’ attitudes toward and trust in the state,
which is likely to both experience volatility and become politically salient in times of crisis, as in

4

pandemics. In investigating patterns of change in both of these contexts, we seek to shed light on
how periods of heightened economic uncertainty and trauma shape public conceptions of the
structure and cohesiveness of social bonds and evolving models of economic governance and the
role of the state. In so doing, we work to connect, theoretically and empirically, patterns of social
cohesion and embeddedness, on the one hand, to the degree to which citizens share a conception
of public purpose with governing elites.
Comparative Macro-Level Approaches to Crises: How Political Systems React
In developing our macro-level theoretical framework, we deploy and seek to build upon two
central scholarly traditions and approaches, each stemming from a core set of theoretical
concerns. The first entails the rich tradition of the comparative historical sociology of capitalism,
exemplified, and in many respects inaugurated, in the work of Karl Polanyi (2001). Polanyi
provides a deeply sociological conception of the emergence of capitalism in nineteenth-century
England, demonstrating that the pursuit of a “market society” was both a deliberate construction
of the state and constrained by limitations to the commodification of labor and the resultant
resistance and mobilization of society in the wake of this pursuit. His account powerfully refutes
the classical nostrums of the market as a natural outgrowth of human nature and of market
structures as self-regulating. The implication, upon which Polanyi expounds in subsequent work,
is that markets are contrived and constructed as institutionalized political projects and, as such,
are merely one historically occurring basis of economic organization. For Polanyi, the socially
embedded character of markets reflects a broader truth: that, in its unadulterated form, the logic
of markets lies in tension with human society and is inconsistent with human life. Prior to the
beginning of the process of market construction in the late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
Polanyi shows, the evolution of economic life was informed by the much older norms of
reciprocity and redistribution, whereby conceptions of equity and mutual reliance gave rise to
economic relationships that were much less transactional and much more ensconced in organic
social relationships than the “utopian” endeavor of market construction would acknowledge
(Polanyi 1957). The implication is that patterns of economic change and adjustment to disruptive
economic shocks are informed by deep structures of human solidarity, which both attenuate the
imprint of market forces on those processes and inform the arrangements and norms that govern
human responses to them and to the disruption that market capitalism can engender. This
perspective also provides a theoretical construct through which to understand the character of
social bonds and how they help to inform public views of the state and attendant policy
expectations.
Though largely neglected by political scientists until the 1990s, Polanyi’s emphasis upon
the socially embedded character of capitalist economic relations provided a touchstone for
subsequent critiques of the neoliberal, market-based orthodoxies of the past four decades. One
scholar in this vein is Mark Granovetter, whose work brought similar insights to bear on more
contemporary economic questions and debates over the appropriate and feasible scope of market
arrangements in advanced industrial economies (Granovetter 1985). Granovetter argues that that
even highly modern forms of economic life are deeply embedded in social structures and
institutions. He argues that the level of economic embeddedness “has always been and continues
to be more substantial than allowed by economists and formalists,” who tend to reduce economic
life to hypostatized images of atomized individuals (Granovetter, 1985: 483). Like Polanyi,
economic sociologists like Granovetter locate the foundations of capitalist economies in the social
relationships and institutions on which market transactions ultimately rely, relationships that

5

nurture norms at odds with the transactional and atomized view of human beings central to
classical and neoclassical models. This perspective suggests that in any capitalist economy, and
particularly at moments of uncertainty, upheaval, and precariousness, such as during the
COVID-19 pandemic, people are forced to seek support from non-market sources, whether that
support be in the form of state-sponsored and -funded benefits or regulations, or from their fellow
citizens, both directly within, and notionally beyond, their immediate familial and social circles.
In both contexts, individuals seek support from and rely upon the collectivity, whether in the
form of the commonwealth represented by the state or in more immediate and localized contexts.
Here again, patterns of social cohesion and a shared sense of public purpose are inter-related.
The second body of scholarship that informs our broad analytical framework, also largely
neglected by mainstream approaches to comparative politics and political economy, seeks to
historicize and identify mechanisms behind the socially embedded economic structures and
norms that govern workers’ responses to disruptive economic change. The so-called “moraleconomy” literature, exemplified in the seminal work of E.P. Thompson (Thompson, 1964), grew
out of the so-called “New Left” in Britain in the 1950s and 1960s, including Marxist scholars and
public intellectuals such as Stuart Hall and Ralph Milliband, who contended that “culture and
ideology had become as important as class in determining the course of history,” in the words of
Louis Menand (Menand 2021): 49). If Polanyi and Granovetter theorized the inherently social
character of economic relationships, moral economists like Thompson investigate how such social
contexts give rise to the norms that define the limits of transactional market relationship—what
he calls the “cash nexus”—and give rise to the collective understandings of economic life that
govern social and political responses to economic dislocation. Echoing Polanyi’s point about the
venerable pedigree of norms of reciprocity and redistribution, Thompson argues that “a moral
economy . . . suppose[s] definite, and passionately held, notions of the common weal,” “a
consistent traditional view of social norms and obligations, of the proper economic functions of
several parties within the community” (Thompson, 1971: 79). More recent work, which builds
upon Thompson’s work by applying his approach to more recent political-economic episodes,
include Peter Swenson’s (1989) work on Swedish and West German industrial relations in the
1980s and Charles Sabel’s (1982) analysis of evolving “world views” among skilled and unskilled
workers in France and Italy, with particular emphasis upon workers’ “constant struggle to
impose moral order on the economy.”3
Focusing upon specific contexts in which “moral economies” are likely to be disrupted or
to become politically operative, such scholarship provides powerful tools for understanding
contemporary public and élite reactions to the devastation of the COVID-19 pandemic, and crossnational variation in patterns of reinvigorated public economic governance unmatched since the
Great Depression. In similar fashion, we seek to understand how differing degrees of social
embeddedness, and the horizontal ties—both actual and notional—that constitute them inform
varying degrees of public trust in government, as well as related support for various kinds of
policy responses. If, as we hypothesize, social cohesion and a shared sense of social identity,
stemming from a more embedded model of capitalism, inform greater trust in government, a
pattern that we observe in Germany, we also expect it to lead to more extensive and
comprehensive policies that protect and subsidize social and economic groups and more cohesive
approaches to public health, compared to countries that lack the same degree of a shared sense

For prominent work in this tradition in comparative sociology, see especially the work of James C. Scott
(e.g., (Scott 1976).
3

6

of public purpose, such as the United States. This hypothesis finds indirect support in recent
research that finds that countries and regions with greater degrees of social embeddedness and
cohesion, which on study characterized as “civic capital,” have displayed greater degrees of both
cooperation among citizens in the wake of COVID-19 and more consistent support for publichealth measures (e.g., Durante et al., 2021).

Micro-Level Approaches to the Nexus between Politics and Public Opinion: How the Publics React
Unlike wars, whose emergence is often the product of longstanding international tensions,
COVID-19 was largely unanticipated and made its impact felt almost instantaneously. Within
weeks, the pandemic grew from a reported incident in China to a full-fledged global pandemic,
a quintessential exogenous shock. Its sudden onset, and the resulting epistemological and
narrative instability across both mass publics and political and economic elites and the broader
social and political instability that it occasioned, provides potentially fertile ground on which to
assess the effects of similar shocks on social cohesion and trust and attendant support for public
interventions in social and economic policy and public health. Whereas our knowledge about the
institutional system guides our theoretical framework about what governments did, we need to
turn to public opinion research to understand how the public reacted in these two countries.
In theory, it is possible to differentiate between the reactions of the public to the pandemic
itself and to policy responses taken to deal with it. This can be achieved by two means: by asking
people what they think before governments have taken any measures in a relatively small
window after the pandemic’s onset by asking different questions, some about the pandemic itself,
some about government measures. In practice, however, this proves to be more difficult. There is
a significant time lag between sudden events and their effects on public polling.4
There is a disparate literature about crises and their effects on public opinion. It is helpful to focus
attention on studies that look at crises that cannot be easily attributed broader problems with
society, government or the economy, with much longer gestational periods and time horizons.
Whereas, in such instances, citizens use their assessment of the perceived underlying problems
in order to form their attitudes about the crisis (Goerres and Walter 2016), we should focus on
public opinion reactions to pandemics and natural catastrophes and, to a lesser extent, wars, the
closest obvious analog.
There is robust evidence about a unifying effect of external shocks in support of the
executive and incumbent governments and administrations. In the United States, for example.
such “rally” effects can be seen after military conflicts, with the necessary condition of some
media attention to the topic as an intermediary variable. The micro-level mechanism seems to be
that those who are ambivalent about the executive or government tend to favor the government
(Baker and Oneal 2001; Baum 2002). Elite criticism of government immediately after the onset of
the crisis is less prevalent in the media (Groeling and Baum 2008). Citizens perceive a stronger
elite consensus in such contexts and adjust their attitudes accordingly.
The individual reactions that lead to such effects are driven by powerful emotions. Threats
trigger anxiety and the desire for security, which citizens often seek from public officials and

As a result, we are constrained to some extent by the timing of polling efforts and their relationship to
government actions, such as executive orders introducing physical distancing measures, which were
introduced within days.

4

7

institutions. There are various psychological theories based upon the notion that humans seek a
world that is predictable and secure (Lambert, Schott, and Scherer 2011). Although military
conflicts are the most-studied trigger of a rally-around-the-flag effect, such studies also identify
the importance of affirming in-group memberships in response to perceptions of threats from
outgroups. The effects of such dynamics extend beyond public opinion about government
responses to crises to social behavior. Winkler, for example, shows that disasters strengthen
adherence to social norms by an average of 11% (Winkler, Max 2020). Going beyond this initial
observation, he explains that shared collective experience of disaster strengthens group cohesion.
Altruism with respect to one’s in-group seems to be a close partner of conflict and catastrophe
(Bowles 2008). These reactions essentially stem from human nature, and we should expect them
to play out in any political system, with real limitations to the effects of behaviors shaped by
nationally distinctive institutions.
Hypotheses
Drawing from these theoretical frameworks, we anchor our empirical study in a series of
hypotheses:
Hypothesis #1: The onset of pandemics will increase support for incumbents and political trust
in government in both countries in the short run.
Wars have been shown to create prosocial behavior at the individual level (Bauer et al.
2016) and to encourage burden-sharing and institution-building at the collective level (Obinger
and Petersen 2017). The collective experience of hardship during war seems to lead to a logic of
“we share the burden, we share resources” (see Titmuss 2019: chap. 4). Covid-19 was not a war,
but it had some characteristics that remind us of war experiences. For one, it was impossible not
to be directly affected by COVID-19 in one’s everyday life. It was health-threatening and deadly
for a substantial group with unknown consequences for long-term health. Like wars, it affected
the economy and thus the lives of many indirectly as well. Prosocial behavior by more people is
a plausible expectation, because the economic devastation wrought by the pandemic far exceeded
the capacity of individuals or even significant social groups to manage. The traumatic experience
of COVID-19 might also lead to altered preferences and thus a higher level of prosociality.
Prosocial behavior is also likely to play out by means of attitudinal change of social trust.
Hypothesis #2: Social trust will increase in both countries in the short run.
As in the case of in wars, citizens will support major government interventions related to
health policy, as in the case of economic policy. It would thus be plausible to expect that citizens
would grow accustomed to more government activity though that experience. It would be
reasonable to expect that this effect would be more visible in the United States where the federal
government is fragmented and baseline state capacity is weaker than in Germany. However, it
remains unclear whether this shift in attitudes would be related primarily to the scope of
government or, rather, to the intensity of government activities.
Hypothesis #3: With respect to social and economic policy, we would expect path-dependence
and cross-national policy divergence, with increased support for typical highly individualized
provisions in the US, in contrast to support for more collectively- or group-oriented policies in
Germany.

8

Given the magnitude of the pandemic’s shock to the two societies, it is reasonable to
expect significant change in the policy priorities of their populations. Obviously, COVID-19
increased the salience of some issues that should be reflected in public opinion data. It is relatively
trivial to expect that health policy issues will become more important in such a context. It was in
people’s self-interest to prepare themselves for the actual danger of infection and the related need
for medical care. However, the two countries differ massively in the ways in which its healthcare
systems are organized, a fact which provides reasons to expect different sets of expectations
across the two countries. In Germany, coverage of health insurance is quasi-universal, with
benefits funded and managed by shared contributions and administrative tasks between worker
and employer representatives. The public hospital system is quite robust, and public-health
infrastructure is relatively well developed. In the United States, by contrast, despite the expansion
of coverage resulting from the Affordable Care Act, coverage is spotty and incomplete, benefit
terms are much less generous, with patients often forced to pay significant out-of-pocket costs in
the form of co-payments and co-insurance, with the result that health-care costs are one of the
most common reasons for personal bankruptcies in the US. Public hospitals are also fragmented
and uneven in terms of geographical coverage, and public health infrastructure is very
underdeveloped underfunded, with widely varying capacities across states.
Moreover, unemployment as a problem should be more salient in people’s minds.
However, here too, the two countries differ massively in the ways in which unemployment
protection is organized. In Germany, normal unemployment insurance pays up to 67% of a
worker’s previous wage, with benefit duration scaled by age and time of employment but
typically lasting at least a year. Thereafter, the less-generous “Hartz IV” social-assistance benefit,
the result of significant reforms undertaken by the administration of Social Democratic
Chancellor Gerhard Schröder in the early 2000s, kicks in (Vail 2010). In the United States, by sharp
contrast, unemployment insurance is limited a few hundred dollars per week, varying
significantly by state. Whereas German workers and employers view unemployment insurance
as a Bismarckian benefit paid for through contributions over time, in the US the benefit is heavily
stigmatized and is contingent upon often-onerous job-search, reporting, and monitoring
requirements designed to discourage eligible workers from obtaining the benefit.
The economic dislocation resulting from the pandemic leads one to expect that the
problem of social inequality will become more prominent in people’s minds. The pandemic was
much harder on people who had fewer assets, could not work remotely, who lived in more
constrained living circumstances, and who had care responsibilities for children or dependent
adults. Under such circumstances, it is reasonable to expect an increase in the salience of economic
inequality, but it is less clear how citizens socialized in these two systems would interpret and
respond to it. Traditionally, the American public is much more tolerant of social inequality than
the German public. Bénabou and Tirole (2006) explain this difference as an ultimately cultural
difference related to the prevalence of the belief that individuals and their children can succeed
economically. Given this, it is reasonable to expect that the salience of social inequality would rise
in both countries, but that the demand for government action will be less in the US, because fewer
citizens make the cognitive link between social problems and the government as a legitimate actor
to counter them. This reasoning leads us to our final hypothesis.
Hypothesis #4: Support for policy measures to reduce inequality will increase in Germany, but
not in the US.

9

Methods and data

Research design and Data
This is a comparative case study of how different political and social systems react to the same
exogenously created crisis. One case is one country-crisis episode. We have two cases: the United
States in the period 2019-21 and Germany in 2019-21. Within our cases, we concentrate on policy
responses on the national level of government and on public opinion of the adult population as
a whole and take the overtime variation within that period into consideration.
We use the Covid-19 pandemic as an exogenous shock to the two countries. The origin of
the pandemic did not lie in either of these two countries. The reaction in the two countries as to
what the governments did and the public thought is thus a reaction to that shock. The challenges
in the two countries as to health, the labor market and the economy were very similar, but as we
demonstrate, the reactions were quite different.
At first glance, the two countries’ distinctive institutional landscapes would lead one to
expect particular kinds of differences in their responses to this kind of exogenous shock I
Although both are federal systems, with associated limitations on the capacity of the national
state, the separation of powers in the American case, with a robust system of judicial review and
a directly elected executive independent of the legislature, poses additional limitations on federal
power. In Germany, by contrast, a parliamentary system in which the government emerges from
and is responsible to a parliamentary majority, in which the purview of judicial review is more
constrained, administrations confront fewer obstacles to aggressive responses to crises. In the US,
moreover, where the past two years have witnessed perhaps unprecedented degrees of political
polarization and vast partisan swings in the character and priorities of government, a casual
observer would be justified in concluding that the weakness of shared public purpose would
undermine a coherent policy response and lead to policy fragmentation and incoherence. Given
that crises present challenges to which responses are chiefly crafted by the executive branch, a
standard institutional account, focused on the constitutional distribution of authority, would lead
one to expect a more rapid and robust response in the German case than in the American. As we
discuss below, however, such a standard institutionalist framework fails to provide the analytical
tools required to explain either the scope or the character of the German and American responses
to COVID-19. Our data suggest a quite different story, one related to differences in the two
countries’ moral economies, ways in which economic institutions are socially embedded, and
major differences between the two states’ abilities to craft responses consistent with shared social
purpose.
We can thus use these differences to explore to what extent the similar experiences and challenges
were channeled differently in the two countries. Causally, we make use of the logic of within case
designs, namely that Germany in February 2020 is very similar to Germany in January 2020 with
the main differences that the first local infections of Covod-19 had taken place. The exogenous
origin of the pandemic made the assumption very plausible that a temporal change can be
attributed to Covid-19. However, we must be careful not to discount the difference between
reaction to the pandemic and reactions to other reactions by other political actors. Thus, for
instance, a rise in political trust after the onset of the pandemic can be a function of fear being
more prevalent in the population or of appreciation of the measures that are taken.
We have collected an abundance of data. We have been able to make use of various policy
collectefforts by other people (e.g., (Matthews 2021a), (McCollum 2020a), Süddeutsche Zeitung,

10

2020, Bruegel, 2020) and secondary usage of existing analyses as to policy responses. In addition,
this paper makes ample use of a variety of commercial and scientific public opinion data. Future
iterations will provide exact references. All data are accessible to the public (Edelman Trust
Barometer, More in Common, Politbarometer, Freiburger Politikpanel, Pew International),
scientists (gesis internet panel) or through commercial database available to us (Kaiser Family
Foundation, Gallup). Short notation in brackets gives a first hint to the source. The public opinion
data differ widely in their definition of the target population (voters, residents, citizens), in their
age definition (some start at 16, most at 18; some truncate at higher age), their sampling procedure
(some use random sampling, some quota sampling, others convenience sampling) and their
survey mode (phone, online).

Empirical Analysis: Public Policy Responses to COVID-19 in Germany and the United
States
Like many advanced industrial countries, Germany and the United States rapidly deployed vast
fiscal and administrative resources following the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic in March
2020 and have continued to provide economic support well into 2021. The measures involved,
which varied from loan guarantees and payroll subsidies to businesses, to investments in public
infrastructure, to direct assistance to families and individuals, were designed to meet both the
unprecedented scale of the public-health challenges in both countries and the economic
devastation that they left in their wake. We provide a timeline of major events in the pandemic
and German and American policy initiatives in Figure 1 below.

11
Figure 1: Major Events in the COVID-19 Pandemic and Policy Responses

In Germany, the scale of the initiative echoed that of the response to reunification in 1990,
when more than €100 billion was spent in its immediate aftermath and nearly €2 trillion over
three decades but has been deployed over a much briefer time frame.5 In the US, the magnitude
of the response is unmatched since the Great Depression, with some observers characterizing
President Joe Biden as a modern incarnation of Franklin Roosevelt. Following the feckless and
incompetent response of the Trump administration, the new administration has undertaken an
astonishing deployment of state power and resources, shifting the prevailing policy-making

5

For an overview of Germany’s fiscal response to reunification, see (Vail 2018).

12

paradigm away from the small-government and neoliberal orthodoxies that even the post-2008
Great Recession had been unable to displace (Alter 2021) (Carter 2021).
Although a combination of administrative and regulatory burdens, compounded by
political errors by the government of Chancellor Angela Merkel, have plagued Germany’s
vaccination campaign, in comparison to a more effective and aggressive American response, both
countries’ fiscal- and economic-policy responses have been breathtakingly ambitious, paralleling
those by several other advanced industrial countries. Including all discretionary spending until
and including March 2021, the US has spent more than any other country as a share of the size of
its economy (at 27.1% of GDP), while Germany’s at 20.3% of GDP, is seventh largest in the world
(Matthews 2021b). We provide a general overview of the character of the two countries’
responses, along with characteristic policy responses, in Table 1 below.
Table 1: American and German Policy Responses to COVID-19

Country
United States

Key Substantive Focus

Characteristic
Policy
Initiatives
Fragmented investment in Coronavirus
Preparedness
public health
and Response Supplemental
Appropriations Act
Supporting
affected
businesses and individuals
Paycheck Protection Program
Expansion of SNAP
Income-contingent
direct
payments to individuals

Germany

Systematic investment
public health

in Corona-Schutzschild
Deutschland

Subsidization of key groups Expansion
program
and social constituencies

of

für

Kurzarbeit

Soforthilfe for small businesses
Expansion of child benefits
Below, we outline these policy responses in both countries, providing an overview of
discrete measures, their intended effects, and associated expenditures. In so doing, we pay
particular attention to measures that have been crucial to each country’s strategy for responding
to the economic damage done by the pandemic and salient in public debates, thereby identifying
those measures that have shaped public opinion and prevailing discourse surrounding the state’s
social and economic role and related conceptions of solidarity and mutual support among the
two countries’ citizenries.
Germany: Subsidizing Business, Supporting Workers and Families, and Bolstering Public Investment

13

Germany’s economic-policy strategy in the wake of COVID-19 has involved a combination of
generous support for public-health initiative and an extension of both direct and indirect support
to core constituencies of the Social Market Economy, including core industrial firms, small
businesses, workers in key industries, and families. As the vice-chancellor and finance minister
Olaf Scholz famously said on 13 March 2020: “This is the Bazooka with which we are doing what
it takes”(Süddeutsche Zeitung, 2020), an image borrowed from the European Central Bank’s
handling of the 2008/9 financial crisis. In late March 2020, Merkel’s government announced two
major initiatives to support economic activity and buffer groups disproportionately affected by
the mounting economic toll. The first, the so-called Corona-Schutzschild für Deutschland, or
“Coronavirus Protective Shield for Germany,” entailed three central initiatives. The first allocated
a total of €353.3 billion (including €156 billion in new federal loans), including €3.5 billion for
health-related measures such as personal protective equipment (PPE) for hospitals and
investments in vaccine development. The second devoted €55 billion to remedy hospitals’ and
doctors’ deteriorating finances and provide support to families, including subsidies for lost
earnings resulting from closed schools and daycare centers and the associated need to care for
children at home, and extended access to family allowances normally reserved to low-income
families to workers with lost or reduced wages. The package’s third major component involved
€50 billion in so-called Soforthilfe (“Immediate Assistance”) for small businesses, freelancers, and
the self-employed(Bundesfinanzministerium, 2021a). The second major initiative, the
Wirtschaftsstabilisierungsfonds, or Economic Stabilisation Fund, earmarked €891.7 billion for
support for larger firms, particularly those with strategic economic importance. This measure
included €400 billion in loan guarantees and €100 million for an assistance program for firms to
be established within the Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW), a government-managed
development bank. It also included various tax breaks and abatement for firms to assist with
short-term balance-sheet difficulties (Bundesfinanzministerium, 2021a).
Not limited to firms and families, the German government has also provided extensive
support for workers, particularly those in manufacturing and strategically important export
sectors. The signal initiative in this category involves expenditures on so-called Kurzarbeitergeld,
or “Short-time Work Program.” Originally created in the aftermath of Germany reunification and
resuscitated and extended in the wake of the post-2008 Great Recession, these schemes, which
are funded jointly by the federal government and the Bundesagentur für Arbeit, or Federal Labor
Office, allow at-risk workers to work reduced hours while receiving up to 90 percent of their
previous pay, in the hopes of avoiding disruptive and costly layoffs. Between March and
December 2020 alone, an additional €23.5 billion was spent on related programs(Bruegel 2020b).
In a “Supplementary Budget” of €122.5 billion adopted in the same month, the government
extended other forms of support to German workers, including an additional €7.7 billion for
Arbeitslosengeld II, the second-tier assistance program for the unemployed.
In June 2020, the government adopted a second major stimulus package, in the amount of
€130 billion, focused on tax relief to German firms and consumers and additional resources to
assist families with children. In order to ease burdens on families while supporting consumption,
VAT rates were cut from 19% to 16% for the standard rate and 7% to 5% for the reduced rate
applied to necessities such as food in grocery stores. The initiative also provided an additional
€300-per-child bonus payment to families with children and more than doubled the income-tax
exemption for single parents, to €4000. The package also extended a number of tax breaks,
including subsidies for municipalities suffering from declining tax revenue and a guarantee that
combined social-security contributions (divided equally between workers and employers) would
not exceed 40%, in an effort to bolster workers’ post-tax and -transfer incomes. For firms, it

14

increased depreciation allowances and created more generous provisions for declaring losses
from previous tax years. Finally, the measure made significant investments in renewable energy
and infrastructure designed to bolster economic activity, including subsidies for purchases of
electric vehicles, investments in battery-technology development, and a major effort to modernize
Germany’s aging fleets of buses and heavy commercial vehicles. In October, the package was
supplemented with an additional €15 billion in grants to companies, and in March 2021 the
reduction in VAT was extended and an additional €150 per child was paid to families with
children (Bundesfinanzministerium, 2021b). Taken together, these initiatives provided urgently
needed support for both investment and consumption and represented remarkably open-ended
commitments for a country normally associated with excessive fiscal probity.
The United States: Investing in Public Health, Subsidizing Affected Industries and Businesses, and
Expanding the Social Safety Net
In early 2020, against the backdrop of the Trump administration’s incompetent and feckless
response and politically motivated denial of the pandemic’s severity, Congress moved in rare
bipartisan fashion to respond aggressively to COVID-19’s devastating impact on American public
health and the economy. In March, three distinct but related measures were passed by Congress
and signed into law by the president. The first, the “Coronavirus Preparedness and Response
Supplemental Appropriations Act,” devoted a modest $8.3 billion to support public health,
dedicated funds to vaccine research, funded broad public-health initiatives on the federal, state,
and local levels, and purchased PPE for medical professionals (Breuninger 2020). The second,
more ambitious package, the so-called “Families First Coronavirus Response Act,” focused on
the pandemic’s economic effects on families and individuals. It devoted a total of $192 billion to
initiatives designed to subsidize workers in distress, including paid sick and medical leave for
certain categories of businesses and significant subsidies to the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP, colloquially knows as “Food Stamps”), temporarily increased the
generosity of Medicaid and Medicare, the federal health-insurance programs for the poor and
elderly, and subsidized existing unemployment-insurance benefits (Committee for a Responsible
Federal Budget 2020).
The third, and much more extensive measure, dubbed the “Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security Act,” passed near the end of March, represented the most extensive (and
expensive) crisis-related rescue and stimulus package since the New Deal. Costing $2.2 trillion,
the measure involved three distinctive areas of assistance. The first area entailed resources
dedicated to supporting the incomes and livelihoods of individuals who had lost their jobs or
been otherwise directly affected by the collapse in employment. One measure increased the
generosity of unemployment insurance, providing an additional $600 per week to increase the
normally much-lower state benefits, while extending the length of eligibility. The second, broader
in terms of its impact and designed both as a relief measure and as an effort to bolster aggregate
demand, offered one-time relief payments of $1200 per adult and $500 per child, up to certain
income thresholds, in the first of what would be several such initiatives in 2020 and 2021. In the
same vein, the measure provided additional funds for SNAP and other forms of food assistance.
The second set of measures was designed to support businesses directly affected by the collapse
in demand and consumption, including $350 billion for forgivable loans to small and mediumsized enterprises, along with other direct subsidies to smaller firms, and $58 billion for airlines,
which had seen air traffic more or less disappear in a matter of weeks. The third focused on
hospitals, public health, and the healthcare industry, including funds for hospitals overwhelmed

15

with COVID cases and forced to cancel lucrative elective surgeries as a result; additional funds
for vaccine development, veterans’ health, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention;
and money for medical equipment and community health centers. In April, Congress passed an
additional program, the Paycheck Protection Program, designed to bolster support to business,
Modeled on European programs of wage and employment subsidies such as the German
Kurzarbeit program, the law provided loans, forgivable under certain circumstances, to firms in
exchange for their commitment to keep workers on their payroll. Although the program was
beset with bureaucratic delays and some abuses, the initiative represented a true innovation in
the US, where such programs had been previously unknown (McCollum 2020b).
As the pandemic dragged on, with a major spike in cases in the summer and the American
death toll spiraling into the hundreds of thousands in the wake of lax public-health enforcement
and compliance in many states, and following President Biden’s electoral victory in November,
Congress acted again, with an additional $900 billion package. Modeled on the March law but
smaller in scope, the initiative focused on extending or bolstering existing programs focused
largely on supporting families’ and individuals’ incomes and the businesses where many of them
worked or had worked. The measure provided additional income-contingent stimulus payments
of $600 per person, additional unemployment payments of $300 per week, childcare and nutrition
assistance, and emergency assistance to renters. On the business side, the law provided an
additional $248 billion for the Paycheck Protection Program, and generous funding for colleges
and universities and the entertainment industry. Unlike the earlier law, the package devoted
modest resources to infrastructure initiatives, including money to expand broadband internet
access for families whose children were being educated at home, and $45 billion for airlines,
highway repairs, and public transportation. Despite some Republican reservations about the scale
of the expenditures, the Senate was still in Republican hands, pending January special runoff
elections for two Georgia Senate seats, and the party was reluctant to be blamed for inaction,
particularly in the wake of President Trump’s clear loss in the November election (Siegel, Stein,
and DeBonis 2021).
Following two surprising Democratic victories in the Georgia Senate runoffs, which gave
Democrats a Senate majority and unified political control, Congress and the new administration
moved quickly to enact the most ambitious and generous package to date: $1.9 trillion, compared
to a $900 billion package in December 2020. After weeks of often acrimonious debate and
complaints from minority Republicans, Biden and the Democratic majority passed the $1.9 trillion
American Rescue Plan in March 2021 with no Republican support. This package was
unprecedented in scale and scope, with generous extensions of previously-adopted measures as
well as an array of new initiatives. Fulfilling a promise made by Democratic Senate candidates in
Georgia and supported by the left wing of the party, the measure provided one-time, incomecontingent payments of $1400 for each adult and child, while also extending the additional federal
payments for unemployment insurance. Breaking with historical patterns of federal support for
children, which had traditionally been provided through non-refundable tax credits rather than
the direct payments common in many advanced industrial countries, the measure introduced six
months of direct family allowances, scaled by family income, that were to be refundable beyond
a family’s tax liability. This paradigm-shifting initiative represented an unprecedented
assumption of federal responsibility for supporting children.6 In addition to direct support for

Though temporary, leading Democrats have expressed the hope of making such an arrangement
permanent.

6

16

individuals and families, and in a provision derided by Republicans as a “blue-state bailout,” the
package extended $350 billion to state and local governments, many of which had been forced to
retrench services and lay off large numbers of public-sector workers in the face of collapsing tax
revenue. The package also included a large array of measures of various kinds, including money
for elementary and secondary schools and colleges and universities, restaurants, early childhood
development programs, vaccine distribution, public transportation and infrastructure, as well as
more than a half billion dollars for the Federal Emergency Management Association’s (FEMA)
Emergency Food and Shelter Program. All in all, the package represented both a strikingly
ambitious response to the COVID calamity and an extension of the American safety net unknown
since Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society Program in the 1960s, with the creation of Medicare, the
American health-insurance program for the elderly, and Medicaid, a federal-state program
providing coverage to the poor and indigent elderly Proclaiming in the wake of the package’s
passage that “Help is here, and we will not stop working for you” (The White House 2021). Biden
celebrated the initiative which, despite lockstep Republican opposition in Congress, enjoyed
widespread public support, including by 41% of self-identifying Republicans or Republican
leaners (Pew Research 2021).

Empirical Analysis: Public Opinion Reactions
Let us start by examining the potential rally-to-the-flag effects. Gallup runs a long-established
global series asking for confidence in one’s government.
Table 2: Confidence in national government, Germany and USA, 2019-2020

Confidence
in
government DE
Confidence
in
government USA

national

2019
57

national

36

+8

2020
65

Source
Gallup1

+10

46

Gallup1

Both countries reveal a clear jump in aggregate confidence in government. The German
public’s confidence rose by 8 percentage points from 57 to 65 percent. The American public’s
confidence rose by 10 percentage points from 36 to 46 percent. What is more, the high levels of
confidence in both countries are exceptional in the long run, looking back to 2006 in this series.
The second-highest confidence level in Germany was 63 %in 2015. In the USA, only 2009 and 2006
witnessed higher levels at 50 % and 56 %.
Table 3: Trust in national government, Germany and USA, 2019-2021

Trust
in
national
government DE (5-9 on scale
1-9)
Trust
in
national
government USA (5-9 on
scale 1-9)

2019
44
39

+19

2020
63

+9

48

-4

2021
59

Source
Edelman1
&2

-6

42

Edelman1
&2

17

From another source (Edelman) and a comparable indicator (trust in government), we see
a similar picture. We see a sizeable jump in trust in government by 19 percentage points in
Germany and 9 points in the USA between 2019 and 2020 and then a receding level of trust in
2021.7 This increase in political trust after the onset of the pandemic has been demonstrated for
other contexts in Western Europe (BOL et al. 2021; Oude Groeniger et al. 2021; SCHRAFF 2020).
Table 4: Approval of national leaders, Germany and USA, 2019-2020

Approval of Merkel
Approval of Trump

2019
62
41

+14
+5

2020
76
46

Source
Gallup
Gallup

In both countries, there was an increase in approval of the national leader. The increase was much
smaller in the United States (+5 %) compared to Germany (+14 %).In sum, we thus see evidence
I both countries for the rally-around-the-flag effects in public opinion. These materialized given
the two different levels of general support or approval of national governments (higher in
Germany than in the United States). The relative changes were upward in both countries between
2019 and 2020 with some evidence, where we already have it, of a slow decline in 2021. Despite
the many institutional differences, we see similar changes as to the deeply human, emotional
reactions in the public mind. This is also what we would expect to see according to Hypothesis#1:
human nature, the need to assurance and safety, dominates over institutionally embedded
learning experiences.
In contrast to the emotional political effects, we cannot put forward any evidence yet for an
increase in social trust (Hypothesis #2). In order to get a sense of changed levels of prosociality,
let us look at the percentages of residents who indicated to have helped a stranger recently. Here,
we see that there is clear evidence against our expectations. The prevalence of helping strangers
declined in both countries between 2019 and 2020 by 5 (DE) and 6 (USA) percentage points.
Table 5: Reported helping of a stranger, Germany and USA, 2019-20

Helped a stranger DE
Helped a stranger USA

2019
45
64

2020
40
58

-5
-6

Source
Gallup2
Gallup2

Table 6: Social trust in Germany and USA, 2020

Most people can be trusted DE
Most people can be trusted USA

2020
58
59

Source
Pew
Pew

Interestingly, the American public when asked in October (?) 2020 to estimate how trust in national
government may have changed or stayed the same during the pandemic, only 5 % said that it improved in
juxtaposition to 54 % who thought that it had gotten worse. In Germany, 19 % thought it had gotten worse
and 28 % better.
7

18

For social trust, we are still lacking data from before the crisis. We thus cannot access Hypothesis
#2 yet. In 2020, the levels of social trust were indistinguishable in the two countries at 59-59
percent 8
Furthermore, in Germany, there was strong evidence for support for status-maintaining policies
as to positions on the labor market. By our own estimates from May/June 2020 data [gesis1], we
see that four measures that directly support jobs had approval rates of 50% and more. Per-head
payments for the public that would benefit everyone was only supported by 21% of the populace.
Table 7: Policy attitudes towards anti-Covid19 economic and social policies in Germany in May/June 2020

Policy measure
Public financing of Kurzarbeit program with full reimbursement to
employers (including social contributions)
Public financing of Kurzarbeit program, including for Mini-jobs
Increase in Kurzarbeit payments from 60 % to 80 % of the most recent
net wage
State subsidies for firms and sole proprietorships without obligation
of reimbursement
State subsidies for new hires, e.g., through reduction of social
contributions
Public payments to all citizens

Support in the
adult population
71
67
81
68
52
21

In another survey at the same time [Politb1], one-off payments for families with children also
found a majority of 57%. Note that there is not a single question about healthcare. This is because
the near-universal healthcare system is in principle not controversial at all in Germany.
Turning now to the American public opinion data on specific policies, we notice
immediately that health policy started off as the most salient policy area before the crisis and
remained constantly so. Various surveys of the Kaiser Family Foundation reveal that the most
important issue domain for the American public (as to their voting intentions) was health policy:
89 % in February 2020 just before the pandemic, 85% in May, 87 in September and 91% in October
2020 [Kaiser1-5]. In other words, the electoral salience of health policy was not really affected by
the pandemic in the US because it had already been salient so much before. Therefore, it comes
as no wonder that health policy changes suggested to fight the pandemic found broad majorities,
too.
Table 8: Policy attitudes towards anti-COVID economic and social policies in the USA in July 2020

Policy measure
increasing government financial assistance to help more
Americans who don’t get health insurance through their jobs
purchase coverage top priority /important

Support in the
adult population
84

In Regions with more civic culture (and higher levels of social trust), the lockdown measures
created greater mobility reductions resulting in fewer deaths for Italy and Germany (Durante,
Guiso, and Gulino 2021). This leads to a cross-sectional negative relationship between levels of
social trust and exposure to Covid-19 risks.
8

19

creating a government-administered health plan, sometimes called
a public option, that would compete with private health insurance
plans and be available to all Americans

73

increasing federal funding to state governments to help pay for
their Medicaid programs
providing government financial assistance for people who have
lost their jobs to purchase health insurance through their previous
employer, sometimes called COBRA insurance

79
82

[Kaiser3, July].
Let us finally move on to public views on inequality. Both countries, show high levels of
worry for division. This is certainly not the same as worry about inequality. But still, for after the
Covid crisis, 67% of Germans and 89% of Americans are worried about greater division in society
[MiC1]. In Germany, there is evidence for an increase in support for a wealth tax for rich people
with €500,000 in assets and more to combat the economic consequences of the pandemic. In May
2020, there were already 45% in support rising to 64% in November 2020 [Jäckle1]. Such a wealth
tax would obviously target the rich and benefit the non-rich. This rise in support is not mirrored
in a rise for the solidarity contribution that has been levied since the 1990s in order to promote
socio-economic inequality between East and West where support remains at merely 17% risen
from 15%. Among Americans, 67% supported a universal basic income for everyone for the
course of the pandemic in July 2020 [Kais1], but there is no evidence for any drastic measures
against inequality that would be sustained in the long run. This is, at least tentatively, supportive
of our Hypothesis #4.
In sum, we find first support for positive reactions along the logics of a rally-to-the-flag
effect in both countries by increases in confidence and trust in government and approval of the
national leaders. We still lack pre-crisis data for social trust and cannot asses our prediction there.
The policy-specific reactions seem to be surprisingly predictable given the intensity and breadth
of the pandemic in its consequences. Citizens seem to remain relatively unshaking in the ways in
which they want governments to react. The German public seems to be supportive, as we would
expect, of drastic policies to combat equality whereas in the US, we only see moderate evidence
for time-boxed measures that would only be in place for the duration of the crisis.

Conclusion: Social Embeddedness, Public Opinion, and Public Policy: The Lessons of
COVID-19
In this paper, we have traced German and American economic-policy responses to COVID-19
and sought to explain the two countries’ varying policy responses as the products of differing
moral economies and patterns of embeddedness of economic relationships in the two political
economies. We have done so through a systematic investigation of shifts in public opinion on the
two countries, drawing from a wide range of available data sources, with particular emphasis
upon levels of public trust in government and support for varying kinds of policy initiatives. As
elsewhere, COVID-19 represented an unanticipated, and in many respects unprecedented, social,
economic, and political shock to the two countries, challenging established understandings of the
relationship between state and market and destabilizing existing policy-making paradigms, as
elites cast about for effective ways to respond to and manage the ensuing social and economic

20

crisis. The trauma of the pandemic led to highly emotionally charged public responses, with
significant increases in public trust in and reliance upon government in both countries. Borrowing
an analogy with a concept usually invoked in wartime, this development reflects a significant
“rally-around-the-flag” effect in both countries, an understandable reaction but one that was
perhaps surprising in the United States, given the deep currents of public distrust and
demonization of government that have prevailed since the 1980s. That said, the character of shifts
in public opinion differed markedly in the two countries. In the United States, where economic
relationships are much more disembedded and the moral economy more fragmented and
individualistic, the public disproportionately supported individualized benefits and assistance to
individualized firms directly affected by the pandemic’s economic fallout, reflecting the logic of
post-hoc, palliative care. In Germany, by contrast, where economic and labor-markets are more
deeply embedded and institutionalized, and where workers and employers have traditionally
shared a common, if sometimes contested, sense of public purpose, surveys reflected support for
investments in existing collectivized labor-market institutions, with policies designed to avoid
layoffs and preserve existing institutions. If the American response reflected a logic of post-hoc,
palliative care, then, its German counterpart reflected one of preventative medicine combined
with systemic support for established social and economic relationships.
Although our data are of recent vintage and the full scale of the effects of the pandemic
on support for government and economic-policy interventions will likely take several years to
unfold, our research does suggest several important lessons and implications for future research
on the effects of cataclysmic shocks, such as pandemics and wars. First, despite widely varying
baseline levels of support for government cross-nationally, such events tend to bolster public
support for the kinds of collective responses that only states can provide. In ways that echo the
venerable maxim that there are no atheists in foxholes, it would seem that there are relatively few
libertarians or anarchists in pandemics. Second, the kinds of policy interventions supported by
citizens may well parallel, and perhaps even reinforce, pre-existing levels of social embeddedness
in the economy, with patterns of group-based solidarities, or their relative absence, acting as both
outgrowths and reinforcements of existing institutions and established political and social
practices. In this context, distinctive national moral economies and social and economic
institutions are tightly linked, with exogenous shocks such as the COVID-19 pandemic revealing
these underlying shared moral and conceptual frameworks in ways that are not reducible to
simple institutional dynamics. Finally, in a more speculative vein, we suggest that the ways in
which such underlying normative structures mediate between catastrophes and both public
attitudes and social and economic arrangements may take years to unfold, much as the Black
Death in the fourteenth century steadily eroded feudalism in ways that were far from obvious at
the time. In future research, we hope to exploit the increasing availability of longitudinal publicopinion data related to COVID-19 to arrive and more systematic conclusions about the
relationship between catastrophes and public attitudes.

21

References
Alter, Jonathan. 2021. “Opinion | Can Biden Be Our F.D.R.?” The New York Times, April 12, 2021,
sec.
Opinion.
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/12/opinion/biden-fdr-newdeal.html.
Baker, William D., and John R. Oneal. 2001. “Patriotism or Opinion Leadership?: The Nature and
Origins of the ‘Rally 'Round the Flag’ Effect.” Journal of Conflict Resolution 45 (5): 661–87.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0022002701045005006.
Barry, John M. 2004. The Great Influenza: The Story of the Deadliest Pandemic in History. Penguin.
https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/288950/the-great-influenza-by-johnm-barry/.
Bauer, Michal, Christopher Blattman, Julie Chytilová, Joseph Henrich, Edward Miguel, and
Tamar Mitts. 2016. “Can War Foster Cooperation?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (3):
249–74. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.30.3.249.
Baum, Matthew A. 2002. “The Constituent Foundations of the Rally-Round-the-Flag
Phenomenon.”
International
Studies
Quarterly
46
(2):
263–98.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-2478.00232.
Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2006. “Belief in a Just World and Redistributive Politics.” The
Quarterly
Journal
of
Economics
121
(2):
699–746.
https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2006.121.2.699.
BOL, DAMIEN, MARCO GIANI, ANDRÉ BLAIS, and PETER JOHN LOEWEN. 2021. “The Effect
of COVID-19 Lockdowns on Political Support: Some Good News for Democracy?”
European Journal of Political Research 60 (2): 497–505. https://doi.org/10.1111/14756765.12401.
Bowles, Samuel. 2008. “Being Human: Conflict: Altruism’s Midwife.” Nature 456 (7220): 326–27.
https://doi.org/10.1038/456326a.
Breuninger, Kevin. 2020. “Senate Passes $8.3 Billion Emergency Coronavirus Package, Sending
Bill
to
Trump’s
Desk.”
CNBC.
March
5,
2020.
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/03/05/senate-passes-8point3-billion-coronavirus-billsending-it-to-trumps-desk.html.
Bruegel. 2020a. “The Fiscal Response to the Economic Fallout from the Coronavirus | Bruegel.”
2020. https://www.bruegel.org/publications/datasets/covid-national-dataset/.
———. 2020b. “The Fiscal Response to the Economic Fallout from the Coronavirus | Bruegel.”
2020. https://www.bruegel.org/publications/datasets/covid-national-dataset/.
Bundesfinanzministerium. 2021a. “Emerging from the Crisis with Full Strength - Federal Ministry
of Finance - <span>Issues</span>.” Bundesministerium Der Finanzen. April 2021.
https://www.bundesfinanzministerium.de/Content/EN/Standardartikel/Topics/Publ
ic-Finances/Articles/2020-06-04-fiscal-package.html.
———. 2021b. “Combating the Coronavirus: Germany Adopts the Largest Assistance Package in
Its History - Federal Ministry of Finance - <span>Issues</span>.” Bundesministerium
Der
Finanzen.
April
1,
2021.
https://www.bundesfinanzministerium.de/Content/EN/Standardartikel/Topics/Prio
rity-Issues/Corona/2020-03-25-combating-the-corona-virus.html.
Carter, Zachary D. 2021. “Opinion | The Coronavirus Killed the Gospel of Small Government.”
The
New
York
Times,
March
11,
2021,
sec.
Opinion.
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/11/opinion/coronavirus-economygovernment.html.

22

Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget. 2020. “Families First Coronavirus Response Act
Will Cost $192 Billion.” Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget. April 6, 2020.
https://www.crfb.org/blogs/families-first-coronavirus-response-act-will-cost-192billion.
Durante, Ruben, Luigi Guiso, and Giorgio Gulino. 2021. “Asocial Capital: Civic Culture and
Social Distancing during COVID-19.” Journal of Public Economics 194 (February): 104342.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2020.104342.
Goerres, Achim, and Stefanie Walter. 2016. “The Political Consequences of National Crisis
Management: Micro-Level Evidence from German Voters during the 2008/09 Global
Economic
Crisis.”
German
Politics
25
(1):
131–53.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09644008.2015.1134495.
Granovetter, Mark. 1985. “Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of
Embeddedness.”
American
Journal
of
Sociology
91
(3):
481–510.
https://doi.org/10.1086/228311.
Groeling, Tim, and Matthew A. Baum. 2008. “Crossing the Water’s Edge: Elite Rhetoric, Media
Coverage, and the Rally-Round-the-Flag Phenomenon.” The Journal of Politics 70 (4): 1065–
85. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022381608081061.
Lambert, Alan J., J. P. Schott, and Laura Scherer. 2011. “Threat, Politics, and Attitudes: Toward a
Greater Understanding of Rally-’Round-the-Flag Effects.” Current Directions in
Psychological Science 20 (6): 343–48. https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721411422060.
Martini, M, V Gazzaniga, N L Bragazzi, and I Barberis. 2019. “The Spanish Influenza Pandemic:
A Lesson from History 100 Years after 1918.” Journal of Preventive Medicine and Hygiene 60
(1): E64–67. https://doi.org/10.15167/2421-4248/jpmh2019.60.1.1205.
Matthews, Dylan. 2021a. “How the US Won the Economic Recovery.” Vox. April 30, 2021.
https://www.vox.com/22348364/united-states-stimulus-covid-coronavirus.
———. 2021b. “How the US Won the Economic Recovery.” Vox. April 30, 2021.
https://www.vox.com/22348364/united-states-stimulus-covid-coronavirus.
McCollum, Betty. 2020a. “H.R.266 - 116th Congress (2019-2020): Paycheck Protection Program
and Health Care Enhancement Act.” Webpage. 2019/2020. April 24, 2020.
https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-bill/266.
———. 2020b. “H.R.266 - 116th Congress (2019-2020): Paycheck Protection Program and Health
Care
Enhancement
Act.”
Webpage.
2019/2020.
April
24,
2020.
https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-bill/266.
Menand, Louis. 2021. “The Making of the New Left.” The New Yorker. March 22, 2021.
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2021/03/22/the-making-of-the-new-left.
Neil Fligstein, Steven Vogel. 2020. “Political Economy After Neoliberalism.” Text. Boston Review.
October 5, 2020. http://bostonreview.net/class-inequality/neil-fligstein-steven-vogelpolitical-economy-after-neoliberalism.
Obinger, Herbert, and Klaus Petersen. 2017. “Mass Warfare and the Welfare State – Causal
Mechanisms and Effects.” British Journal of Political Science 47 (1): 203–27.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007123415000162.
Oude Groeniger, Joost, Kjell Noordzij, Jeroen van der Waal, and Willem de Koster. 2021. “Dutch
COVID-19 Lockdown Measures Increased Trust in Government and Trust in Science: A
Difference-in-Differences Analysis.” Social Science & Medicine 275 (April): 113819.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2021.113819.
Pan, J. C. 2020. “Facing a Pandemic in the New Gilded Age.” The New Republic, March 4, 2020.
https://newrepublic.com/article/156744/facing-pandemic-new-gilded-age.

23

Pew Research. 2021. “Most Americans Support $1.9 Trillion COVID-19 Aid Package; Just a Third
Say It Spends Too Much.” Pew Research Center - U.S. Politics & Policy (blog). March 9, 2021.
https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2021/03/09/broad-public-support-forcoronavirus-aid-package-just-a-third-say-it-spends-too-much/.
Polanyi, Karl. 1957. “The Economy as Instituted Process.” In Trade and Markets in the Early Empires:
Economies in History and Theory, edited by Karl Polanyi, Conrad M. Arensberg, and Harry
M. Pearson. Glencoe, IL (USA): The Free Press.
———. 2001. The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origns of Our Time. Boston:
Beacon Press.
Sabel, Charles F. 1982. Work and Politics: The Division of Labor in Industry. Cambridge Studies in
Modern Political Economies. Cambridge [Cambridgeshire] ; New York: Cambridge
University Press.
SCHRAFF, DOMINIK. 2020. “Political Trust during the Covid-19 Pandemic: Rally around the
Flag or Lockdown Effects?” European Journal of Political Research n/a (n/a).
https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6765.12425.
Scott, James C. 1976. The Moral Economy of the Peasant: Rebellion and Subsistence in Southeast Asia.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Siegel, Rachel, Jeff Stein, and Mike DeBonis. 2021. “Here’s What’s in the $900 Billion Stimulus
Package.”
Washington
Post,
2021.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2020/12/20/stimulus-package-details/.
Süddeutsche Zeitung,. 2020. “‘Bazooka’ gegen Corona: Bund errichtet Riesen-Schutzschild.”
Süddeutsche.de,
March
13,
2020.
https://www.sueddeutsche.de/wirtschaft/wirtschaftspolitik-bazooka-gegen-coronabund-errichtet-riesen-schutzschild-dpa.urn-newsml-dpa-com-20090101-200313-99318308.
Swenson, Peter. 1989. Fair Shares: Unions, Pay, and Politics in Sweden and West Germany. Cornell
Studies in Political Economy. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
The White House. 2021. “Remarks by President Biden on the American Rescue Plan.” The White
House. March 13, 2021. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speechesremarks/2021/03/12/remarks-by-president-biden-on-the-american-rescue-plan-2/.
Thompson, E. P. (Edward Palmer). 1964. The Making of the English Working Class. New York:
Pantheon Books.
Thompson, E.P. 1971. “The Moral Economy of the English Crowd.”
Titmuss, (Richard M.). 2019. Essays on “The Welfare State.” Bristol: Policy Press.
Vail, Mark I. 2010. Recasting Welfare Capitalism: Economic Adjustment in Contemporary France and
Germany. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
———. 2018. Liberalism in Illiberal States: Ideas and Economic Adjustment in Contemporary Europe.
Liberalism
in
Illiberal
States.
New
York:
Oxford
University
Press.
https://oxford.universitypressscholarship.com/view/10.1093/oso/9780190683986.001.
0001/oso-9780190683986.
Winkler, Max. 2020. “Do Disasters Affect Adherence to Social Norms?”
https://www.mxwinkler.com/research.

