Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021

Pp. 381-397

DOI:https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/covid.28
Female Saudi University Students’ Perceptions of Online Education Amid COVID-19
Pandemic
Nasrin Altuwairesh
College of Languages & Translation
King Saud University
Riyadh- Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Email: naltuwairesh@ksu.edu.sa

Received: 3/6/2021

Accepted: 4/21/2021

Published: 4/24/2021

Abstract
The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic has wreaked havoc and caused world-wide disruptions
to daily activities, including education. Numerous mitigation measures were taken to slow down
the rapid spread of this pandemic. The situation, subsequently, entailed utilizing technology to
ensure the continuation of the educational process. The abrupt shift to online education presented
significant challenges to teachers and learners alike. Uncovering students’ perceptions of their
online education experience will help address and deal with these challenges. This study
attempted to explore the perceptions of Saudi female undergraduate students of their online
education experience amid the COVID-19 pandemic. The total of 241 female students at the
College of Languages and Translation at King Saud University in Riyadh answered a multi-item
online survey. The results revealed that many of the respondents were happy with their online
learning experience, enjoyed learning online and looked forward to their online classes.
However, when asked to compare online learning to brick-and-mortar classes, more than half of
the participants stated that they prefer traditional, face-to-face learning. The results of this study
also revealed that the significant problems students faced in online education related to staying
motivated, technical issues and the absence of face-to-face interaction. Despite the many
challenges they face when learning online, the most cited advantage for online education
mentioned by the participants is that it is more convenient. The results also indicated that this
education mode seemed to suit shy students more, as they stated that they participate and ask
questions more in online classes.
Keywords: COVID-19 pandemic, female Saudi EFL university learners’ perceptions, elearning; online education; technology
Cite as: Altuwairesh, N. (2021). Female Saudi University Students’ Perceptions of Online
Education Amid COVID-19 Pandemic. Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on
Covid 19 Challenges (1)381-397. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/covid.28

381

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Female Saudi University Students’ Perceptions of Online Education

Altuwairesh

Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has taken its toll on all aspects of our lives, including
education. The only solution to ensure the continuation of education at all levels worldwide was
to optimize the use of technology. Thus, in response to the pandemic, there was a complete shift
to online instruction in most countries around the globe. The government of Saudi Arabia was
proactive in implementing strict measures to contain and mitigate the spread of COVID-19. One
of the earliest measures taken by the government of Saudi Arabia was the closure of schools and
universities in March 2020, soon after the first COVID-19 case was confirmed in the country.
This strict measure led to the abrupt move to electronic platforms, which caused some disorder to
the educational process during that academic year, i.e., 2019-2020. Higher education institutes
seemed to have suffered less than schools due to the availability of technological infrastructures,
specifically learning management systems such as blackboard. Despite having such
infrastructures, neither instructors nor students were ready for such an abrupt change.
However, when the new academic year started in September 2020, the students, along
with instructors, have already had some previous experience dealing with online education. The
general assumption was that things were settled, and students would not be facing as many issues
with online education as in the previous semester. Many teachers, before the outbreak of the
pandemic, have not embraced technology, either partially or entirely, in their classrooms for a
variety of reasons. Thus, instructors with prior experience with online teaching were definitely at
an advantage over their less tech-savvy colleagues. However, the situation has forced all
educators to take technology onboard and move to online learning. Technology is, undoubtedly,
a double-edged sword; if utilized effectively, it can be bliss; if otherwise, it can be a woe.
There was a pressing need to continue education amid the pandemic despite the
disruption it has caused to educational systems worldwide. Research indicates that the impact of
this shift to online education on university students has been profound, as there was a sharp drop
in their satisfaction levels after the move to online courses (Means & Neisler, 2020). Further,
research proves that many aspects of the learning experience are influenced by the expectations
and strategies adopted by instructors, such as student satisfaction and academic performance
(Bailey & Lee, 2020). Thus, uncovering students’ perceptions of their online experience is
expected to help instructors deal with the areas that need to be addressed when designing and
implementing an online course. The study in hand attempted to reveal the perceptions of female
Saudi undergraduate students about their experience with online education amid the pandemic.
Literature Review
Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge Model
The tendency has been to only look at technology without paying closer attention to how
it can be used effectively. Yet, the mere introduction of technology into education is never
enough. There has been recent attention paid to the vital question of what teachers have to know
for them to be better capable of incorporating technology appropriately into their classrooms
(Mishra & Koehler, 2006). The Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge (henceforth
TPCK) model was proposed by Mishra and Koehler (2006) and argues for the need for a
complex and situated form of knowledge for the pedagogical use of technology in the classroom.
This framework is based on the understanding that “teaching is a highly complex activity that
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
382
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Female Saudi University Students’ Perceptions of Online Education

Altuwairesh

draws on many kinds of knowledge” (p. 1020). In this model, the areas of content, pedagogy and
technology, which are all essential for delivering good teaching, are treated as interrelated
aspects of teaching, rather than separate entities (Mishra & Koehler, 2006). Koehler and his
colleagues (2007) have claimed that the relationship that holds between these three elements is
dynamic and that “good teaching with technology requires understanding the mutually
reinforcing relationships between all three elements taken together to develop appropriate,
context-specific strategies and representations” (p.741). In other words, integrating technology
effectively into teaching requires knowledge of the relationships that hold between these three
elements (Koehler et al., 2007).
Content knowledge relates to knowledge about the subject matter that is taught.
Pedagogical knowledge, on the other hand, is concerned with the profound knowledge about the
practices and methods related to teaching and learning that cover all aspects of the educational
process, including student learning, lesson planning, student evaluation, and classroom
management. Technology knowledge relates to knowledge about both standard and advanced
technologies and the skills needed to operate such technologies. The nature of technology
knowledge (TK) tends to shift with time due to the changing nature of technology (Mishra &
Koehler, 2006). Further, this model relates to pedagogical techniques which utilize the use of
technology to help teach subject matters constructively.
TPCK is a developing form of knowledge that goes beyond the individual components it
consists of, i.e., technology, pedagogy, and content knowledge. TPCK represents the base on
which good teaching with the use of technology depends and necessitates the understanding “of
the representation of concepts using technologies” (Mishra & Koehler, 2006, p.1029). The model
simply argues that there can never be a single solution applied, to every course, teacher, or
teaching method. Using new technology in any course is not like adding a new module to the
same course. Effective integration of technology into teaching requires thoughtful consideration
of the three elements of content, technology, and pedagogy, the complex relationships between
these elements, and careful interweaving of these three primary sources of knowledge for
teachers.
Online Education
The advent of technology has drastically changed practices in many aspects of human
life. The history of online courses dates back to the 1980s, when the first course to be entirely
online in the USA was delivered in 1981. The mid-1980s witnessed the first online graduate and
undergraduate courses initiated by some schools and universities in the USA (Sun & Chen,
2016). A cornerstone in the history of online education was the advent of the World Wide Web
(WWW) in 1991, which facilitated the fast expansion and growth of online learning and teaching
in the USA and worldwide (Sun & Chen, 2016). Online education is defined as “a format used in
learning when learners do not need to be in brick-and-mortar classrooms” (Sun & Chen, 2016, p.
159). Means and Neisler (2020) define online instruction simply as “instruction offered via the
internet to students using their own computers” (p. 4). The internet and the World Wide Web
have brought about so many changes and advantages to education. With the new generation
being digital natives, online learning is expected to be more exciting and appealing.

Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

383

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Female Saudi University Students’ Perceptions of Online Education

Altuwairesh

Online education has its opportunities and advantages, such as opening up “new markets
for higher education institutions” (Sun & Chen, 2016, p. 160). Online learning further facilitates
the education of adult learners, who have to juggle many responsibilities, such as work, family,
and study. Moreover, the nature of online environments allows for more participation by shy
students who are not in favour of face-to-face classes due to their personality traits. Further,
research illustrates the many benefits online education presents to teachers and learners,
including improved pedagogical practices, classroom engagement, self-confidence, and
communication-skills (D. Bailey & Lee, 2020). Other benefits relate to being more convenient
than traditional brick-and-mortar classes, having more learner-centered activities, and increased
student motivation. These benefits are witnessed due to a shift in the role played by instructors in
virtual classrooms, from being mere disseminators of information to facilitators, which gives
students more space for active participation in the learning process (D. Bailey & Lee, 2020).
Online learning communities are thought to provide learners with an environment that
enables them to learn effectively through the growth of three forms of presence, namely
teaching, cognitive and social presence (Sun & Chen, 2016). These three forms of presence are
intertwined and interchangeable, with each presence playing a distinctive role. According to Sun
and Chen (2016), many studies have demonstrated a strong correlation between social interaction
and having a sense of community among learners and their impact on gaining a successful online
learning experience. Further, a study conducted by Bailey and Card (2009) sought to reveal
effective pedagogical practices for online teaching as perceived by fifteen experienced, awardwinning e-learning instructors. Based on the analysis of the one-to-one interviews, eight effective
pedagogical practices for online education have been uncovered. These pedagogical practices
include fostering relationships, engagement, timeliness, good communication, organization,
effective utilization of technology, flexibility, and having high expectations.
Learning in online education can be synchronous, asynchronous, or a mixture of both.
According to Means and Neisler (2020), several practices are recommended for online
instruction, including having shorter activities, live sessions, frequent assessments, group
projects, using ‘breakout groups’ during live classes, sending students personal messages to ask
about how well they are doing in the course or to ensure that they can access course materials,
using real-world examples when explaining course content, and setting tasks that would ask
students to share what they have already learned and what they think they still need to learn in
the course. Means and Neisler (2020) stated that incorporating a larger number of these
recommended teaching practices resulted in better student satisfaction with their online learning
experiences. Of these eight recommendations, the two practices which had the most significant
impact on students were including personal messages to learners on how well they have been
doing in the course and activities that require them to reflect on things they have already learned
and those they still need to know (Means & Neisler, 2020).
Redmond (2011) traced the journey of two academics as they transitioned from face-toface teaching to fully online education through archived online discussions as well as three onehour semi-structured interviews. The study helped shed light on the changing beliefs and
pedagogical practices of these two academics over four years. Redmond (2011) summarized six
frameworks that present a chronology of the various views on the roles played by instructors in
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

384

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Female Saudi University Students’ Perceptions of Online Education

Altuwairesh

online education. This summary led her to explain that despite using different names for the roles
played by online teachers, the activities most commonly done by teachers include designing,
management, organization, facilitation, and instruction. Another significant finding Redmond
reached was that “the process of facilitating discussion appears to be a key role when teaching in
the online space as it explicitly appears in five of the six frameworks” (p. 1053).
The move from face-to-face teaching to entirely online, Redmond (2011) says, challenges
the roles and the expectations of learners and instructors alike. One major issue is that
experienced instructors in traditional, brick-and-mortar education face an identity threat when
moving to online classes, and in fact, “find themselves as novices or beginners when they first
teach online” (p. 1052). The results of this study illustrated a shift in the way instructors would
communicate with their students online, and how they designed their online courses, which took
into account the students’ experiences. The study also emphasized the significance of critical
reflection, dialogue, and support during the instructors’ journey from fully face-to-face to fully
online teaching. The two instructors’ progress during this pedagogical journey was enhanced by
their reflections and their search for professional development. In fact, reflection, Hodges and
Fowler (2020) state, “is situated as part of standard instructional design processes” (p.118).
Redmond (2011) further clarifies that the move to online education, whether partially or
entirely, calls for changes introduced to practice and pedagogy to achieve effective learning
outcomes. Other studies have demonstrated that the move to online education has shifted the role
of an effective instructor to a facilitator rather than a teacher (C. J. Bailey & Card, 2009).
However, despite the many benefits of online learning, there must be challenges that have to be
addressed when planning online education. Some of the challenges identified in the literature on
online education include learners being distracted by other online content, having technical
problems, and having barriers to authentic communication opportunities (D. Bailey & Lee,
2020). The following section will shed light on some studies that have explored the challenges
and opportunities presented by online education.
Studies on Online Education
Sun and Chen (2016) conducted a comprehensive review study on research and studies
focusing on online learning. The authors reviewed literature reviews before 2008 and empirical
studies after 2008. They aimed at shedding light on the good aspects and strategies of online
learning and what makes it a success, thus providing a platform of discussions for both
policymakers and educators on ways for developing and delivering effective online courses.
This, Sun and Chen (2016) explain, is expected to offer whoever plans on embracing online
education with best practices which will ultimately help them make informed decisions during
the implementation process.
Sun and Chen’s (2016) review revealed that developing a sense of community within an
online environment is in fact a major challenge. To achieve this sense of community, the studies
reviewed in this paper indicated the importance of promoting “social presence, interaction, and
collaboration” (p. 170), with social presence mainly defined as students’ participation. Thus, Sun
and Chen (2016) argue that it is the duty of instructors and learners alike to “make a joint effort
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
385
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Female Saudi University Students’ Perceptions of Online Education

Altuwairesh

to get deeply involved in constructing interaction and collaboration between the instructor and
students and among students to create an effective online learning community” (p.170). This
article also reviewed the best pedagogical practices and strategies that are needed to achieve
effective online teaching. A significant finding is that teachers, unquestionably, play a crucial
role in online education through facilitating discussions, answering students’ questions,
designing course materials and assignments, and evaluating students’ learning outcomes. As Sun
and Chen (2016) bluntly put it, “technology does not – and cannot – replace the role and position
of the teacher” (p. 171).
Cole, Shelley, and Swartz (2014) also conducted a three-year study that aimed to uncover
the level of satisfaction of graduates and undergraduates at one university with online instruction.
Their research demonstrated that students were moderately satisfied with online education and
more satisfied with hybrid or partially online courses than fully online ones. The most cited
reason for students’ satisfaction with online education was “convenience,” whereas the top
reason for their dissatisfaction was “lack of interaction.” Attempting to understand what makes
online learning satisfactory to learners will help inform instructional design and curriculum
development, which relates directly to student retention (Cole et al., 2014).
The “Survey of Student Perceptions of Remote Teaching and Learning” was developed to
investigate the experiences of undergraduate students who were taking courses during the sudden
transition to online instruction in response to the outbreak of COVID-19 (Means & Neisler,
2020). The survey aimed at revealing the nature of the courses taught online during the
pandemic, as well as the variety of challenges undergraduate students faced after the transition to
online education, and the features of courses associated with higher levels of student satisfaction.
This study surveyed a random sample of more than 1000 college students in the United States
who witnessed the sudden transition from in-person to completely online learning during spring
2020. The results of Means and Neisler’s study demonstrated a remarkable decrease in student
satisfaction with their courses after the move to online instruction, with only 19% of the sample
expressing their satisfaction with their online course experience. Sending students personal
messages and asking them to reflect on what they have learned were cited as the two factors that
had the most significant impact on student satisfaction with online courses. The results indicated
that sending students personal messages on how they have been doing helped maintain their
motivation, which was cited by the respondents as the most significant challenge they faced due
to the move to online learning.
Means and Neisler’s (2020) report also helped reveal some of the aspects that students
thought suffered most due to the move online. These included collaborating with colleagues on
course work, maintaining students’ interest in the course, and making students feel like part of
the class. The most significant challenges, according to the sample in this study, had to do with
staying motivated, not knowing where to seek help with the course, and feeling unwell to
participate in the course, either physically or emotionally. These were the challenges that related
most closely to being overall satisfied with the course. Other themes that emerged from this
study related to the learners’ missing the presence of their instructors and colleagues while
learning, not having immediate feedback from instructors on their performance, missing the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
386
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Female Saudi University Students’ Perceptions of Online Education

Altuwairesh

chance to understand course content better through discussions with peers. Some of the major
issues reported by the participants related to internet connectivity, limited access to suitable
computer devices, having other family and/or job responsibilities, and the unavailability of
appropriate places at home for doing the course work.
Bailey and Lee (2020) also attempted to shed light on the challenges and opportunities
online education presents for EFL university instructors. This survey study illustrated several key
findings due to the unique situation the world is going through at the time of COVID-19
pandemic. One key finding stated that having experience teaching online was positively related
to expected communication channels and activity selection. Further, instructors with no
experience teaching online expressed frustration with online education and other related digital
teaching activities. This group of instructors also perceived more potential problems when
teaching online. The two other groups, on the contrary, perceived fewer obstacles due to their use
of a variety of activities and using more communication channels to deliver such activities.
The benefits and challenges to students that have been reported were quite similar across
the three surveyed groups, i.e., the no-, low-, and high- experience groups. Some of the benefits
for students included having more time to answer, making use of online writing tools, and
practicing writing. On the other hand, the students’ challenges the survey revealed included:
having to collaborate with other students, becoming distracted, and attending online meetings.
Further, it is during such difficult times that “the need to make online educational opportunities
easy to access takes on new importance because many learners might not be in an emotional state
to focus on learning” (Carter et al., 2020).
A study conducted by Cohen and Baruth (2017) attempted to characterize online learners
and examine the relationship between learners’ personalities on the one hand and how satisfied
they were with fully online academic courses on the other hand. The study also looked into the
possibility of predicting learners’ satisfaction with online courses according to their personalities.
The results of Cohen and Baruth’s research demonstrated that being open to experiences and
conscientious significantly predicted students’ levels of satisfaction with online learning.
In the Saudi context, Mahyoob (2020) attempted to investigate the challenges faced by
EFL learners at tertiary level amid the pandemic through the use of an online survey. The study
focused on learners’ views on the sudden transition to online education during the early days of
the shift to online mode. The sample included 184 students, both male and female respondents.
The results demonstrated that most of the challenges the students faced had to do with technical
issues, mainly problems with blackboard and internet connection, which had its impact on
exams, tasks, and class attendance. Further, a major obstacle reported by the students was
communicating effectively with their instructors during online education. The findings of this
study further showed that most participants were not completely satisfied with online learning.
Based on the review of relevant literature presented above, the study in hand aimed at
examining the perceptions of female EFL learners at tertiary level amid the COVID 19
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

387

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Female Saudi University Students’ Perceptions of Online Education

Altuwairesh

pandemic. Uncovering students’ perceptions of their educational experiences, particularly novel
experiences, will thus inform pedagogy and lead to better teaching practices.
Methods
The present article reports on a case study that attempted to reveal the perceptions of
Saudi female, undergraduate students of online education during the COVID-19 pandemic. The
respondents were 241 female, undergraduate students aged 20-24, enrolled at the Department of
English Language and Translation, the College of Languages and Translation at King Saud
University in Riyadh. They have completed at least five levels of their undergraduate degree.
The researcher purposefully targeted students from higher levels, i.e., levels six, seven, and eight,
because they would have already had enough experience with brick-and-mortar classes at
university level and would therefore be able to compare their university educational experience
before and after the outbreak of the pandemic and the consequent shift to online education.
The respondents had to fill in a five-Likert scale, multi-item, online questionnaire, which
consisted of several closed-ended items and two open-ended ones. The closed-ended items
related mainly to whether the students enjoyed online learning, were happy with their
experience, and whether they preferred virtual or traditional classroom learning. On the other
hand, the two open-ended questions aimed at investigating the advantages and disadvantages of
online learning from the students’ point of view. The response rate to this survey was relatively
high, as it reached more than 80% of the targeted group, which could be an indication of the
students’ eagerness to voice their opinions on online learning. Unlike the study conducted by
Mahyoob (2020), which gathered data on students’ perceptions on online education during the
early days of the shift to virtual classes, the present study gathered data during the second
semester in the history of entirely online learning in Saudi Arabia. Students, have already had
experience with online education and the technological issues that come about with it, and are
thus less likely to report on major technological issues.
The survey items sought to reveal the students’ perspectives on online education,
including the challenges they face during online learning as well as the advantages they see in
this mode of learning. Based on what has been mentioned above, this study aimed at answering
the following research question:
What are the perceptions of female Saudi undergraduate students of online education amid the
COVID-19 pandemic?
The data collected through the closed-ended questionnaire items were analysed
descriptively. Descriptive analysis of the results fulfils the purpose of this article, as it provides a
simple and clear interpretation of the data. In other words, descriptive analysis satisfies the aim
of providing the reader with a clear idea of the participants’ perceptions of online education. On
the other hand, the responses to the two open-ended questionnaire items were analysed
thematically.

Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

388

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Female Saudi University Students’ Perceptions of Online Education

Altuwairesh

Findings

Figure 1 Being happy with online learning experience
As Figure one indicates, around 40% of the participants said they are happy with their online
learning experience. Only 22% clearly stated that they are not satisfied with their online learning
experience, whereas 34% of the respondents were neutral about it.

Figure 2 Enjoying online classes
Figure two presents another finding, which is relatively consistent with the previous one, that
44% of the participants said that they enjoy online classes, 31% were neutral about it. In
comparison, only 25% did not enjoy online learning.

Figure 3 Looking forward to online classes
When asked about whether they look forward to their online classes or not, 38% said they looked
forward to them, 27% were neutral, whereas 35% said they did not look forward to their online
classes, as shown in Figure three above.
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

389

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Female Saudi University Students’ Perceptions of Online Education

Altuwairesh

Figure 4 Preference for face-to-face learning
According to Figure four, around 60% of the participants prefer face-to-face learning, nearly
25% were neutral about it, and only 16% do not prefer face-to-face learning.

Figure 5 Preference for traditional classes
Figure five shows that 33% of the respondents prefer online learning, 16% were neutral about it,
whereas half do not like online learning. This finding corroborates the previous one.

Figure 6 Participating more in online classes
When asked about participation, nearly half of the respondents agree that they participate more
in online classes, as shown in Figure six, while 20% were neutral about this statement, and 28%
disagreed with it.
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

390

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Female Saudi University Students’ Perceptions of Online Education

Altuwairesh

Figure 7 Feeling more comfortable with asking questions when learning online
Figure seven reveals that almost 55% of the sample students feel more comfortable asking
questions when learning online, nearly 25% were neutral, and 20% did not agree with this
statement.

Figure 8 online learning being more helpful than traditional learning
Figure eight demonstrates that almost 50% disagree with finding online learning more helpful
than traditional classroom learning, whereas 24% agreed to this statement, while 26% were
neutral about it.

Figure 9 Learning more in an online environment
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

391

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Female Saudi University Students’ Perceptions of Online Education

Altuwairesh

When asked about whether they believe they learn more in an online environment or not, 25% of
the participants agreed to learning more online, whereas 41% disagreed, and 33% were neutral
about this statement, as indicated in Figure nine above.

Figure 10 Instructors possessing good technological knowledge
A positive finding shown in Figure 10 above indicates that most participants, i.e., nearly 75% of
them, agree that their teachers have enough knowledge about using online teaching tools, 18%
were neutral. In contrast, only 7% disagreed with this statement.

Figure 11 Benefiting more from recorded lectures
When asked about recorded lectures, 77% agreed that they benefit more from lectures when
recorded, 13% were neutral, whereas only 9% disagreed with this statement, as shown in Figure
11 above.
Further, the survey attempted to uncover the problems students face with online learning.
According to their responses, the participants’ biggest issues were staying motivated to do well
in their courses, having problems with internet connection, and the absence of face-to-face
interaction.
The questionnaire also included two open-ended questions on the advantages and
disadvantages of online learning from the students’ point of view. The students’ responses to
these two questions were analyzed thematically. The themes that emerged from their responses
to the question about the advantages of online learning were mainly two themes that related to
convenience and learners’ traits. The majority of responses to the question on the advantages of
online learning stated that it was convenient in terms of saving time, being more comfortable and
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
392
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Female Saudi University Students’ Perceptions of Online Education

Altuwairesh

flexible, having recorded lectures, and not having to commute to university. Examples of the
students’ responses that illustrate this theme are:
allow us to have enough time to complete homework or projects
saving more time instead of going a far distance to university
the most important for every student is TIME, and online learning saves time
from transportation and the way to and from university
it is a time-saver; you do not have to wake up so early to get ready, have breakfast
and then go to the university
it saves a lot of time (commute time) that I can now use productively
online learning is more flexible
attending classes from your home comfort is, of course, an advantage
better time management + flexibility
some lectures are recorded so I can go back to them
attending classes on time easily
The second most cited advantage had to do with learners’ traits, especially ones related to
students’ shyness and how learning online helped them participate more despite being shy. Some
responses that demonstrate this theme included:
much easier to participate
being able to participate without feeling shy
feeling free to ask questions and answering even if it is wrong
sending my questions without talking or being recognized
no fear or shyness to participate or ask
ask questions comfortably
I can talk with my teacher without feeling shy
that I am able to ask questions and participate more than in real life because I get
very anxious
interact with teachers comfortably
in my presentations I become less nervous
I have more confidence to talk to my teachers
When asked about the disadvantages of online learning, the students mainly mentioned
technological problems, the learning environment with the absence of face-to-face interaction,
and its effect on their levels of motivation and focus, having too many distractions, and
sometimes more tasks to fulfill. The most cited disadvantage by the participants was
technological issues, particularly internet connection problems, sound quality, and lagging in
blackboard.
A central recurrent theme was the online learning environment and how it affected the
students’ ability to focus, stay motivated, and having too many distractions around them during
online classes. Some mentioned that they struggled to find a quiet place to attend their classes.
Further, some participants commented on how isolating the online learning experience is, how
badly they miss attending university, socializing with others, and interacting with them face-toface. Such comments are proof enough for the desperate need to create a sense of community
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

393

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Female Saudi University Students’ Perceptions of Online Education

Altuwairesh

among the learners when delivering an online course. The following were some of the
participants’ actual responses:
create a sense of isolation
missing the face-to-face interaction- not getting to know the teachers personallyloss of motivation and concentration
absence of interaction with teachers and students
never motivated that it kills the excellent student I have in me
I get distracted easily
it’s boring, so we lack attention and get distracted
I do not feel motivated. It does not seem like a real class
not being able to stay focused during classes
finding a quiet place
Another disadvantage of online learning given by the participants related to having more tasks to
do after the abrupt transition to online education, thus being overloaded with assignments,
quizzes, and other coursework. On the other hand, a few responses mentioned by the participants
related to the teachers themselves, either not knowing students, being inconsiderate of them and
their time, or not knowing how to handle technological problems efficiently. Interestingly
enough, the response of one of the participants was, “I think there are no disadvantages.” This
response, in particular, is intriguing as it reflects how diverse the views of students are regarding
their experience with online learning.
Discussion and Implications
This study revealed several findings about the perceptions of female undergraduate
students of EFL online education amid the COVID-19 pandemic. One major finding is that many
of the respondents were happy with their online learning experience, enjoyed learning online and
looked forward to their online classes. Yet, when asked to compare online learning to brick-andmortar classes, more than half of the participants stated that they prefer traditional, face-to-face
learning. The former result could be justified when relating it to another finding of this study
which indicated that students believed their instructors possessed good technological knowledge.
Instructors knowing how to deal with technological tools efficiently results undoubtedly in a
better learning experience. This finding is contrary to the results reported by Mahyoob (2020)
who stated that most students in his study were not satisfied with their online learning experience
and that they had many issues interacting and communicating with their instructors effectively.
Research done on online education has emphasised the key role instructors play in online
learning (Sun & Chen, 2016; Means & Neisler, 2020).
Another major finding is that the students’ most cited advantage for online education was
‘convenience,’ which was also the most cited reason for students’ satisfaction with online
instruction in other studies (Cole et al., 2014; Bailey & Lee, 2020). The results also showed that
the online education mode suited a group of students, particularly those who are shy. This
finding is also supported in the literature, as Sun and Chen (2016) explained that the nature of
online environments allowed for more participation by shy students who do not prefer attending
face-to-face classes due to their personality traits. On the contrary, the most cited disadvantages
for online education by the respondents in this study were the lack of face-to-face interaction and
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

394

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Female Saudi University Students’ Perceptions of Online Education

Altuwairesh

the effect it had on their ability to stay motivated and focused, as well as having technical
problems, particularly with internet connection. These challenges were similar to the challenges
reported by students in other studies, such as the ones by Means and Neisler (2020), Cole et al.
(2014), Mahyoob (2020)and Bailey and Lee (2020).
Having revealed students’ struggle and the many problems they have to face when
attending classes online requires that instructors become more considerate of them and the issues
they have with online learning. We all realize that attending classes online, amidst these difficult
times, can be pretty demotivating. Thus, instructors should show empathy to students and
provide them with the help and support they need. The advice for instructors is to vary the
teaching techniques and strategies used during online education to address the needs of different
learning styles. Following a ‘one size fits all’ approach when teaching online could lead to
limited participation and classroom engagement (Bailey & Lee, 2020), which will undoubtedly
have a negative impact on the learners’ motivation.
To facilitate the development of pedagogical practices, instructors should get into the
habit of reflecting on their professional practice. Reflection entails that by the end of the online
course, instructors would mainly ask themselves about the things that went well and those which
did not, thus they would carry on doing the things that went well and look for better ways to
deliver course items that did not work well. Further, as part of the reflection process, instructors
can ask the students who have completed the course requirements for their views on the contents
of the course and teaching strategies used during the course. Instructors might also face problems
with course design and planning, particularly ones who are not knowledgeable enough about
online class delivery (Bailey & Lee, 2020). Knowing that this type of problem is typical and
looking for solutions, such as reaching out for help, can lead to better online teaching practices.
To understand the online teaching and learning processes better, Redmond (2011) advises
academics to develop the practice of critically questioning their pedagogical practices and to
hold discussions with their peers on such matters. For this to be successful, she says, “there
needs to be a climate of support, the participants need to be receptive to feedback from their
peers, and they should engage meaningfully in reflective practice” (p.1058). As previously
mentioned, personal reflections and the search for professional development helped enhance the
instructors’ progress during their pedagogical journey in Redmond’s study.
The educational process has gone through a tectonic change caused by the unfolding
events that accompanied the outbreak of the pandemic. This time of COVID-19 and the complete
shift to online education has been a catalyst for change and has seen the introduction of
technological innovations in teaching and learning. However, with learners being at the center of
the educational process, an important question posed by this study is whether students are
considered winners or losers of this change? Are we to consider them winners, given that most of
the new generation, if not all, are digital natives? A simple answer to this question, supported by
the results of this study and other similar studies, is that technology indeed has a lot to offer, yet
it is not always perfect, and it can never substitute the critical role teachers play in the
educational process.
The COVID-19 pandemic has brought about many new challenges to both learners and
teachers. Further, the pandemic and the sudden transition to online education has led educators to
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

395

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Female Saudi University Students’ Perceptions of Online Education

Altuwairesh

redefine their roles and teaching practices in virtual classrooms. Online education is all about the
learners; thus, more should be done to reveal the factors that motivate learners to take part
actively in an online course, given that active participation results in better learning outcomes.
Education is inherently a social matter, therefore, more of the social element should be added to
break the ice, engage the students, and increase their motivation during online classes. University
instructors should modify their roles in virtual classrooms from being mere disseminators of
information to facilitators. This presumably will help ensure the involvement and engagement of
learners in the learning process, and when this is achieved, their motivation will most likely
increase.
Conclusion
In conclusion, based on the students’ responses to this survey study, blended learning
seems to be a promising option that would suit learners of different learning styles. In postpandemic EFL classrooms, blended learning would apparently be a better approach that would
facilitate integrating technology into the educational process. Despite that the sudden transfer to
online education amid the COVID-10 pandemic has caught us unaware and caused considerable
disruption, this experience can be viewed as a blessing in disguise. It opened instructors’ eyes to
novel ways of delivering classroom instruction and has led them to learn about new virtual
resources and activities. The shift to online education has been an excellent opportunity for
professional development which should never end; instead, the experience has proven to
instructors that there is no limit to professional development and that they can always learn
something new and embrace new technologies in EFL classrooms.
AuthorAbout the Author:
Nasrin Altuwairesh is Assistant Professor at the College of Languages and Translation (COLT)
at King Saud University in Riyadh/ Saudi Arabia. She holds an MA and a PhD in Education/
TESOL from the University of Leeds/ United Kingdom. She has taught several translation
courses at COLT. Her research interests focus on language teaching, the teaching of translation
and training translators. ORCID id: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0823-0743
References
Bailey, C. J., & Card, K. A. (2009). Effective pedagogical practices for online teaching:
Perception of experienced instructors. Internet and Higher Education, 12(3–4), 152–155.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iheduc.2009.08.002
Bailey, D., & Lee, A. (2020). Learning from experience in the midst of covid-19: Benefits,
challenges, and strategies in online teaching. Call-Ej, 21(2), 176–196.
Carter, R. A., Rice, M., Yang, S., & Jackson, H. A. (2020). Self-regulated learning in online
learning environments: strategies for remote learning. Information and Learning Science,
121(5–6), 311–319. https://doi.org/10.1108/ILS-04-2020-0114
Cohen, A., & Baruth, O. (2017). Personality, learning, and satisfaction in fully online academic
courses. Computers in Human Behavior, 72, 1–12.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2017.02.030
Cole, M. T., Shelley, D. J., & Swartz, L. B. (2014). Online instruction, e-learning, and student
satisfaction: A three year study. International Review of Research in Open and Distance
Learning, 15(6), 111–131. https://doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v15i6.1748
Hodges, C. B., & Fowler, D. J. (2020). The COVID-19 Crisis and Faculty Members in Higher
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

396

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Female Saudi University Students’ Perceptions of Online Education

Altuwairesh

Education: From Emergency Remote Teaching to Better Teaching through Reflection.
International Journal of Multidisciplinary Perspectives in Higher Education, 5(1), 118–
122.
Koehler, M. J., Mishra, P., & Yahya, K. (2007). Tracing the development of teacher knowledge
in a design seminar: Integrating content, pedagogy and technology. Computers and
Education, 49(3), 740–762. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2005.11.012
Mahyoob, M. (2020). Challenges of e-Learning during the COVID-19 Pandemic Experienced by
EFL Learners. Arab World English Journal, 11(4), 351–362.
https://doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol11no4.23
Means, B., & Neisler, J. (2020). Suddenly Online: A National Survey of Undergraduates During
the COVID-19 Pandemic. https://doi.org/10.1145/763940.763929
Mishra, P., & Koehler, M. (2006). Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge: A
Framework for Teacher Knowledge. Teachers College Record, 108(6), 1017–1054.
http://one2oneheights.pbworks.com/f/MISHRA_PUNYA.pdf
Redmond, P. (2011). From face-to-face teaching to online teaching: Pedagogical transitions.
ASCILITE 2011 - The Australasian Society for Computers in Learning in Tertiary
Education, January 2011, 1050–1060.
Sun, A., & Chen, X. (2016). Online education and its effective practice: A research review.
Journal of Information Technology Education: Research, 15, 157–190.
https://doi.org/10.28945/3502

Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

397

