"x"
"1" "Developing initial programme theory:   COVID-19   Genomics   UK Consortium   Hospital-Onset COVID-19 study  ( COG-UK   HOCI)"
"2" "Provisional authorship"
"3" "Paul Flowers 1 *   Fiona Mapp 2   James Blackstone 3   Oliver Stirrup 2   Judy Breuer 4"
"4" "On behalf of  the wider  COG-UK HOCI  team"
"5" "1  Professor of Health Change, School of Psychological Sciences & Health, Graham Hills Building,40 George Street, Glasgow, G1 1QE ;  Paul.Flowers:strath.ac.uk ;"
"6" "2 Institute for Global Health, University College London, London"
"7" "3  Comprehensive Clinical Trials Unit at UCL, Institute of Clinical Trials & Methodology,  University College London,  90 High Holborn, 2nd Floor London, WC1V 6LJ"
"8" "4  UCL Division of Infection and Immunity Wing 1.3, Cruciform Building, Gower Street London, WC1E 6BT"
"9" "Abstract"
"10" "I ntervention programme theory enhance s  the development, evaluation ,  optimisation   and translation  of complex interventions . It  clearly  specifies   the ways intervention context and content combine to produce intervention outcomes.  W e report  the development of  initial programme theory  for  a   SARS-CoV-2   genome  sequence -report  tool (SRT) . The SRT  translates genome sequencing  data  to drive changes in the intensity and location of infection prevention and control (IPC)  and related cleaning  activities within  UK NHS  hospitals   to  reduce nosocomial infections .  The SRT  is  being trialled within   the   COVID-19 Genomics UK Consortium Hospital-Onset COVID-19 study  (HOCI) .  Within  the  HOCI  study , we will   assess  the  impact of  the  SRT ,  and its timing,  when compared to no sequence data,   on  the occurrence and transmission location of  nosocomial infection , reducing  its  incidence rate and identifying previously undetected nosocomial transmission .  To  develop  the  initial  programme  theory   we  us ed   documentary analysis (e.g.  trial  protocol, case report forms, drafts of the SRT), informal discussions with trial team members, and the iterative development of logic models.  The intervention ’ s  causal mechanism s  were conceptualised using   combined  insights from  behaviour al , implementation science and  complex adaptive  systems  perspectives .  Our  initial programme theory will  subsequently be used to  shape  a  process evaluation   within  a  diverse  sample of  trial sites .  T he  planned  process evaluation  will use the initial programme theory  and assess SRT  acceptability, support for  its  putative causal mechanisms,  issues of  fidelity and adaptation ,  and  examine  how the planned intervention has worked , or not,  in relation to intended and unintended consequences."
"11" "Developing initial programme theory:  COVID-19   Genomics   UK Consortium   Hospital-Onset COVID-19 study ( COG-UK  HOCI)"
"12" "Introduction"
"13" "G enome  sequencing technology  has been  used in hosp itals in the UK to  better understand  and manage viruses for over a decade .   H owever   to date  it has failed to  has failed to be widely used in standard NHS care for either viral or bacterial infectious disease transmission prevention. This has been due in part  to high costs and  challenges around storing  and analysing  large amounts of data (Radford et al. 2012).  Th ere have  also  been major problems with the rapidity  in which   genome  seque nci ng  data can be  extracted from samples . Further problems exist in relation to   communicating genome sequence  data  in order to  drive changes that reduce infection transmission .   Consequently  the potential of sequencing has not yet been fulfilled and it remains a  major  under-used resource within healthcare.   Using genome sequencing of epidemic viruses as well as Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) practices has already been shown to result in better prevention of nosocomial transmission than standard IPC (Roy et al. 2019;  Houldcroft  et al. 2018).  In relation to COVID-19 w ith a growing database of SAR S -CoV-2 sequences (#COG-UK) and sufficient viral diversity detected, it is now considered possible to show clustering of this virus in time and space and enable distinctions between likely community and nosocomial transmissions  ( van  Dorp  et al 2020) .   However  the raw sequence data is usually only useful to speciali sts  who can interpret differences in  SARS-CoV-2  genotypes and decide on necessary IPC action.  Thus  for  genome sequencing technology  to impact  infectious disease prevention  and control  generally and in relation to COVID-19 in particular  there are a number of implementation problems that must first be addressed. The current study details the development process and the specification of initial programme theory for a rapid genome sequence report tool  (SRT)  to be used within NHS UK hospitals to assist with the control of hospital onset SARS-CoV-2 infections."
"14" "Overall  the  HOCI   study  is assessing the relative effectiveness of genome sequencing report  tool   (SRT)  on  defining the  incidence , and transmission location, of hospital onset COVID-19 infections .  This  will be assessed in a phase III  prospective, interventional, cohort, superiority study  comparing  rapid  SRTs,   (recei ved  within 48 hours of sample being taken)  and slower use of the SRTs,  to  no sequencing .  The SRT  is   anticipated to  impact   incidence rate s  of   nosocomial  SARS-CoV-2   by illuminating  retrospective  linked infections  and  changing   ongoing  infection prevention and control  activities in relation to their intensity (increasing or decreasing) and  location  within the hospital setting.  The SRT provides rapid feedback to the hospital on nosocomial infection enabling a range of further actions."
"15" "The importance of theorising interventions"
"16" "If  we want to consider the  optimisation,  scalability  or transferability of interventions we need to know  exactly  what they consist of  and   how  they work .  The SRT is no exception.  Equally insights into how they interact with the  context s  of their implementation  is vital .  There is growing recognition of the need to specify assumptions and expectations as to  how  complex interventions work (for example, the updated MRC guidance for complex interventions, MRC 2019; MRC guidance for process evaluation, 2014; guidance concerning intervention development,  O'Cathain  et al., 2019; Craig and Campbell, 2015).  Few would argue about the need for this  kind of  clarity  ( e.g.  Hoffmann et al., 2014) . However, it is less clear exactly how to describe interventions and the way they work   in detail . I nter-disciplinary  or inter professional  perspectives   tend to focus different lenses on describing  intervention  content ( e.g.   biomedical vs social science , or sociological versus psychological )  providing a range of  varied  approaches .  However, there is growing  consensus concerning  the centrality of   both narrative approaches ( i.e.  written programme theory  explaining in detail how interventions work ) and visual formats (e.g., logic models or theories of change  illustrating programme theory at a higher level ). Equally there  is  growing consensus ,   partly shaped by the open science movement ,  about  the need to make descriptions of intervention s   public and  accessible  early within the intervention development  and/ or evaluation cycle.  Programme theory and  accompanying  logic models are both  intended  to make  intervention  change  processes  explicit . Good programme theory and logic models enable communication and consensus within research teams as well as with external stakeholders. Programme theory  provide s a   clear framework  to  articulate or  appraise the causal chains that bind  intervention  inputs to outcomes . They  provide a central tool to theorise intervention s  and  detail  the  relative importance of key elements of  context,  particular  actors, settings,  components,   procedures  and  specific  behaviours   and social practices  for example .  As we increasingly recognise the complexity of our interventions and the contexts in which they work there is an increasing need to articulate what our interventions are made of and how we think they work.  T his  deep understanding  and specification  of how  an  intervention work s   is intended to  enable outcome and process evaluations to focus  effectively .   Moreover  it enables us  to appraise the right mediators in understanding change  processes .  These causal mechanisms are often multi-levelled and not always linear or straightforward.  Again  the development of programme theory enables a fuller understanding of this complexity."
"17" "Although there is consensus about the fundamental need for programme theory within complex interventions, there is less  explicit  agreement about  the  exact  specification of  what programme theory should contain.  Few would argue that e ssential  elements  should  include  the exact   description  of the nature of the problem  the intervention is intended to address , key features of the context,  description s  of  key intervention components  and how they work . The latter should include  a description of  the  components’  causal mechanisms . There should be a clear pathway from context,  components  and mechanisms to  an  intervention’s   outcomes;  anticipated short, medium and long term  (e.g.,  Coryn   et al . , 2011;  Funnell  et al., 2011)."
"18" "A lthough  these simple elements are  an invaluable starting point, this kind of linear, mechanistic approach  to understanding complex interventions  has been critiqued as being inherently limited  (e.g., Rogers, 2008) . Insights from system science, for example, highlight the need to think about  how interactions and interdependencies between these core elements  and the contexts in which they work  can lead to  particular feedback  loops, reinforcing or detracting from  the  planned intervention mechanisms  intended to shape primary outcomes . In turn ,  these  feedback loops or other interdependencies  can  result in emergent effects that could not have been anticipated through any additive model of the intervention components  and their mechanisms .  Similarly,  much of  implementation science  specifically  draws our attention to  the  heterogeneity of contexts, settings and social processes which delivering our complex interventions entails. Drawing upon   different  epistemological  perspectives ,  others still have lamented the lack of common language and terms to describe the  detailed  content of interventions and have developed elegant solutions  to standardis ing intervention content   and causal mechanisms  in the shape of taxonomies or meta-theoretical perspectives (e.g., Michie et al., 2013).  Furthermore, there have been calls to  explicitly  consider   the  importance of the  ‘ dark logic ’  within our programme theory, in other words , focusing  early  on   ways  of  de-risking ou r  interventions ,   reducing the likelihood of   intervention failure,  unanticipated and negative outcomes  ( Bonell  et al., 2015)."
"19" "I n this paper we  report  the   process by which we have  develop ed  our  initial  programme theory .   Here  we  also  go on to  detail its content  prior to the intervention being rolled out and evaluated .   In this way our programme theory  provides  a  detailed  narrative account of the way  we anticipate that  the SRT  will  works within the hospital context .  We are pluralistic in our methods and pluralistic in the range of theoretical perspectives we draw upon."
"20" "Research questions  for developing  initial  programme theory"
"21" "What is the  specific  nature of the problem  the  SRT   addresses?"
"22" "What key features of the context of the research  are  likely to be important in understanding the implementation and evaluation of  the SRT ?"
"23" "What are the key intervention components of  the SRT ?"
"24" "What are the key causal mechanisms that  the SRT  uses to affect its primary and secondary outcomes?"
"25" "What are the key outcomes of the study?"
"26" "Method"
"27" "Initially t he process evaluation team worked relatively independently of the wider trial team who generated the protocol, the  case report forms ( CRFs )  and SRTs.   To develop the initial programme theory  a n iterative design  of  intervention  drafting   and consensus - seeking  with the wider team  was used .  Figure 1 provides a schematic representation of the  overall  process by which we  develop ed  our initial programme theory ;  we drew upon documentary analysis, discussions  with   and presentations and feedback  within the  trial  team  and the examination of examples of the SRT .  Ethical approval has been granted  by Cambridge South Research Ethics Committee (20/EE/0118)"
"28" "Figure 1: An overview of the  resources  used to develop the initial programme theory"
"29" "Documentary  analysis"
"30" "Initially,  PF and FM analysed  the  project documentation  independently . This included   the  emerging  main  trial  protocol,  emerging drafts of  project’s  CRFs ,  materials used within  S ite Initiation Visit s  (SIV s )  as they emerged  and  multiple on-going  discussions within  weekly  trial team meetings . Throughout  the y focused on  both  explicit and  implicit   descriptions of the problem  being addressed , the context  in which the intervention was planned to be implemented ,  the key  intervention components  and  descriptions of  how they were intended to interact,  any mentions of  the intervention ’ s  casual mechanisms  and  how they related to  the  intervention outcomes .   The focus was on making clear implicit assumptions of causal relationships between various elements.  These were noted and visualised within logic models and presented to the wider team in meetings  when time permitted .  PF and FM worked closely  during this time  discussing  with each other  their understandings of the intervention and how it  worked ,  and  seeking clarification with wider team members.  This work was relatively unstructured and took place over a period of around four months.  It  particula rl y  assisted with RQ 1,2,4 and 5."
"31" "Informal  discussions  with team members"
"32" "FM and PF  conducted a series of informal  discussions  ( n= 9 )   with a   broad range of people involved  in  the trial .   T hese included the PI, the  trial  health economist,  the  project  manager ,   members of the trial  management group representing  the lead sites (consultants  in microbiology,  infectious  diseases  and virology)  and people with experience of IPC activity in relation to COVID-19 .  These  informal  discussions were  wide ranging  spanning   perceptions of  the nature and boundaries of the intervention at the heart of the HOCI project, questions concerning the assumptions underpinning the trial,  thoughts about  the key actors imagined to be involved in  both  using the SRT and being affected by the SRT,  ideas concerning  the scope of activities directly affected by the SRT   and a discussion of the wider contexts and influences which might be important in shaping the success of the SRT and the wider trial.  These discussions were used to prompt further thinking about the  importance of context, intervention boundaries and content, potential causal  mechanisms  and the range of intended and unintended outcomes.    No formal transcriptions or analysis too k   place  and this work should be thought of as enriching the process evaluation team ’ s understanding of the SRT and the wider HOCI project.  These discussions helped address  all research questions."
"33" "Analysis of the SRT"
"34" "As noted above neither  PF and FM were  directly  involved in the development of the   science behind the  SRT  or indeed its design. However, they  heard regular reports  of the SRT progress  and saw presentations concerning its  gradual  development .  Once a final version of the SRT was available and being piloted , they were sent a  purposively heterogeneous sample  of completed SR T s to analyse.    PF led  this  a nalysis . T his work was  subsequently  audited by  FM .  This  analysis  particularly  assisted with RQ 3 and 4."
"35" "Theorizing   important  putative  casual mechanisms"
"36" "To address  research question 3  and 4  it  wa s vital to  explore and understand  the casual mechanisms by which the intervention  was   thought to  work.   Our  documentary analysis and team discussions  had highlighted that   overall   the  SRT  works to change  individual  behaviour  (i.e. the recipients of the SRT),  social practice  (i.e. IPC and cleaning activities)  and  subsequently  the  hospital system  in order  to  change the trial  outcomes .   T hree complementary lenses  (see Figure 2)  were used  to understand and theorise  hypothesised  change processes   within the  overall  trial  ( i.e.,  behaviour al science , implementation science and systems science) .  PF led  the  analyses  reported below  and they were  then   audited by FM.  The wider team provided feedback and comments."
"37" "Systems Science                     Systems Science"
"38" "Systems Science"
"39" "Systems Science"
"40" "Implementation science Implementation science"
"41" "Implementation science"
"42" "Implementation science"
"43" "Behavioural science Behavioural science"
"44" "Behavioural science"
"45" "Behavioural science"
"46" "Figure 2:  U sing multiple theoretical lenses to conceptualise intervention mechanisms"
"47" "Theorising the SRT through b ehav i oural science"
"48" "The initial steps (see Figure 1) had all highlighted that  the intervention was conceptualised as the SRT .    As such  we conducted detailed analyses of the SRT."
"49" "T he Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF) (Cane et al., 2012)  was used to describe the causal mechanisms used within the  SRT.  The TDF is  a meta-theoretical framework which integrates 14 key theoretical domains known to be important in understanding behaviour change across a range of populations and settings (Cane et al., 2012) . The TDF  provides a coherent way of organising ,  describing   and theorising the causal mechanism employed within complex interventions. It lends itself to more individualistic and behavioural perspectives (see Appendix for an overview of each of the 14 domains). The behaviour change wheel  (BCW) (Michie et al., 2011)  was  also  used to describe  the SRT . Related to the TDF, t he  BCW  is an over-arching framework that synthesises 19 behaviour change frameworks to design and evaluate behaviour change interventions (Michie et al., 2011) . The architecture of the BCW offers a range of  nine  potential ‘ intervention functions’  which are broad  categories by which interventions can change behaviour: ‘Education’; ‘Persuasion’; ‘Incentivisation’; ‘Coercion’; ‘Training’; ‘Enablement’; ‘Modelling’; ‘Environmental Restructuring’; and ‘Restrictions’ . These behavioural perspectives are vital for understanding how the  SRT  works as they draw attention to the ways in which the intervention can be realised  through the lens of  individual processes, for example ,  cognition and emotion.  Finally, we also used the behaviour change technique taxonomy (BCTT , Michie et al., 2013 ) as a way of analysing the SRT in terms of  detailing  the smallest indivisible descriptions of active behaviour change content  present within the structure of the SRT itself . There  are  a total of 93 BCTS patterned in 16 groups. In this way we specified the SRT in relation to the groups of BCTs and individual BCTs that it employed.    Our analysis here focused on using these tools to describe the SRT."
"50" "In this way we were able to detail hypothesised causal mechanisms  within the SRT  itself  in the language of accepted and standardised causal mechanisms  pitched primarily at the individual level ."
"51" "Theorising changes induced by the SRT with i mplementation science"
"52" "Beyond  our consideration of the  SRT  as the intervention,  i t  wa s also necessary to  consider  how the  SRT  is intended to work within the hospital setting   and  how it activates social practices within  the social networks of relevant professional teams.  This raised key questions: w as the intervention the SRT alone,  for example,  or was there also complementary focussed intervention work on galvanising professional teams to implement infection prevention and control activities  in an optimal manner ?  Equally should the intervention be conceptualised to specify and standardise the  sometimes considerable  work required to get the SRT operational across diverse hospital settings?  Although not a part of the intervention per se but central to its implementation w e focussed specifically on detailing, and theorising, our assumptions about the change processes induced by the SRT within the  diverse  social worlds of the hospital setting."
"53" "There are many ways of considering implementation and its theories (Nilsen, 2015). Here  we   selected   Normalisation process theory   ( NPT )   a s a theoretical  framework  designed to assess issues of implementation and the ways in which intervention s  become part of routine practice,  i.e., that they become  normalised  ( May,  2013).   NPT can be used in intervention development, in optimising evaluation, and in planning implementation  (Murray et al., 2010) .   NPT has four main constructs, and 16 domains (see Appendix X1 for the check list used within this analysis). The four constructs are each important to consider in relation to how  the rapid genome sequence report  works with  key teams in the  hospital settings. They relate to the ‘coherence’ of the intervention ( e.g.  relating to the fit of the intervention into people’s  lifeworlds ), the ‘cognitive participation’ of the intervention (e.g., the bedding in, and sustainability, of the intervention), ‘collective action’ (e.g., how the intervention fuses with existing social processes within the setting) and finally, ‘reflexive monitoring’ (e.g . , how collective action can respond to the intervention itself)."
"54" "We used the NPT constructs and domains to theorise key aspects of the changes induced by the SRT.  As this  development work took place  prior to any data being collected , analysis  involved firstly conceptualising the cascade of actions induced by the SRT and then trying to theorise them using NPT constructs to make explicit how we thought  these aspects of implementation might work. In this way our use of  theor y focussed on hypothesis development about  the social processes involved in the work of the IPC and other teams  within the hospital setting ."
"55" "Theorising changes induced by the SRT though  Systems science"
"56" "Through the initial steps it became obvious that i t is also necessary to  detail assumptions and thinking about  how the  SRT shapes  the response of the overall hospital  within the unfolding context of the   SARS-CoV-2   pandemic .  Again  this work moves beyond the SRT and focuses on a wider set of change processes which are distal to the SRT yet fundamental to the way it might work."
"57" "Complex Adaptive Systems (CAS) perspectives are often heralded as promising a paradigm shift in the ways it is possible to intervene, particularly in relation to health  issues  which are highly complex and  health problems that are  notably  obdurate ( Wilson, Holt and Greenhalgh, 2001; Rutter et al., 2017 ). Drawing upon interdisciplinary insights from diverse areas such as engineering and ecology, CAS perspectives  are varied but all  particularly stress the limitations of any simple, mechanistic approach to understanding the ways interventions work and can be sustained over time (Appendix X3 provides a brief explanation of key CAS concepts and the check list used within this paper)."
"58" "CAS concepts highlight the idea of defining systems boundaries  in order to  assist with the consideration of other systems concepts. For the HOCI intervention it makes sense to think of the system at the level of the hospital  although it should be noted that the concepts have purchase in understanding the  SARS-CoV-2   pandemic at the population level as well.  CAS  concepts  highlight the need to consider the complex relationships  between  elements  within a given system and the way non-linear effects often characterise the behaviour of complex systems .  CAS concepts can help conceptualise  the importance of ‘emergent’, systems-level, effects that result from multiple feedback loops ( e.g.,  system-reinforcing or system-correcting). Complex adaptive systems perspectives invite us to consider and anticipate the self-organisation of systems and their tendency to return to stasis. They also highlight ideas such as ‘tipping points’ in which whole systems shift to a different stable state.  Given the vulnerabilities of the hospital system to effects beyond the teams working within them ( e.g.  Personal protection Equipment shortages, seasonal influenza epidemics , the fluidity of COVID-19 pandemic itself ) it is vital to consider systems perspectives."
"59" "We used  key  CAS concepts to  theorise  the SRT and its  wider  effects  within the hospital as a system .  Using the CAS tool kit  (appendix 3)  we  specif ied  our thinking about  important causal mechanisms  that may  shap e  the effectiveness of the SRT ."
"60" "Results:  describing t he initial programme theory"
"61" "The results are structured according to the research questions. The resulting narrative details our initial programme theory  to be used to structure data collection and analysis during the process evaluation . Our logic models (see Figure  3 ) provide an overview and  high level   visualisation  of the programme theory ."
"62" "Figure  3 :  L ogic model describing  an overview of how the SRT  is thought to  affect the main outcomes of interest"
"63" "1 )  What is the specific nature of the problem the  SRT  addresses?"
"64" "Our developmental work (Figure 1) showed that  the  SRT  fundamentally   identifies  and communicates  which  SARS-CoV-2   cases are  linked and  the likelihood of them being   nosocomial infection .  Using internal  calculations,  the report generation algorithm works without the need for local model checking.  This directly addresses long - standing problems with  issues of  the communication of insights from genome sequencing and the contributes to the accurate identification of nosocomial infection  and the SRTs ’  potential to improve targeting of IPC and cleaning activities. Each of these issues will be explored within the process evaluation."
"65" "Communication of genetic sequencing"
"66" "Our development work (see Figure 1) highlighted that s pecialist knowledge and expertise is typically required to interpret genome sequencing and there are problems with the availability of this expertise that limit subsequent capacity to act , and where it is available, to act in a timely manner .   The SRT resolves  these  problems  by  rapidly  communicating   important interpretations of  genome  sequencing  to a wide range of people  and  translat ing  them   in ways that can   prompt  meaningful action ."
"67" "Accurate  Identification  and prevention  of nosocomial infection"
"68" "Although diagnostic tests for COVID -19  exist and are used widely they can only be used to infer nosocomial infections through their apparent patterning in time and space. Th ese  approach es  struggle to differentiate community acquired vs healthcare associated infection  (HAI) or critically ,  transmission events facilitated by visitors versus HAI .  Assumed and inaccurate  nosocomial infection s are problematic because they divert limited IPC and related cleaning activities to locations where there may  actually have  been no  nosocomial transmission . Unidentified nosocomial infections  may result in asymptomatic patients contributing to onwards transmission  within the hospital . More  broadly unidentified nosocomial infections  result in many negative health outcomes, including higher case fatality ratio than from community acquired COVID-19 given the hospital setting selects those with other health conditions.  Unidentified nosocomial  infections are associated with  preventable  onward transmission  ( within the  ward and  hospital setting  and  potentially  out  into  the community ) .  T hese  preventable  infections can  directly affect  staff ,  resulting in staff absences and lead to strain on  wider  hospital functioning.   Equally, in the absence of accurate identification of  HAIs , staff,  patient  and visitor anxiety may be un-necessarily high.  Without the enhanced accuracy delivered by the SRT unexpected transmission events may also go undetected.   Thus  the SRT resolves problems of the inaccurate identification of nosocomial infection."
"69" "Poor targeting of   strained  infection prevention and control  and cleaning   capacity"
"70" "T here  can be a  lack of clarity  about   transmission events in time and place .  This may result in the poor targeting of   precious  IPC  capacity .  On-going c leaning workload and IPC efforts  focussed on apparent clusters  may be unnecessary or detract from  efforts required for  true nosocomial infection .   Thus  the SRT resolves problems of poor use of limited IPC and cleaning capacity."
"71" "2 )  What key features of the context of the research  are  likely to be important in understanding the implementation and evaluation of  the SRT ?"
"72" "Rapidity of sequencing processes"
"73" "Given the negative consequence s for patient outcomes  of  SARS-CoV-2 , and nosocomial  SARS-CoV-2  in particular, the rapidity of insights into nosocomial infection through genome sequencing is a central part of the context of the SRT and how it might work.  The SRT is always retrospective, illuminating nosocomial infection in the recent past, and its capacity to make a difference to reducing  SARS-CoV-2  incidence in the future relies upon the timeliness of collecting and processing specimens and translating the information into the SRT as quickly as possible.  If the sequencing and  the creation of the SRT  reports  suffer time delays this will negatively impact on the way the SRT is intended to work. As such the time criticality of the SRT will be a focus for the process evaluation."
"74" "‘ Just enough ’  COVID"
"75" "T he intervention  depends upon   key features of the context  in which it is implemented .  For  example  at a fundamental level a s the COVID-19 pandemic unfolds and transmission  rates fluctuate ,  the  SRT  can only work if there are  ongoing  nosocomial infections.  Equally, if there is too much  SARS-CoV-2  infection, too much nosocomial transmission, or other infectious disease outbreaks ( e.g.  norovirus) the intervention is unlikely to gain traction or be implementable  or deliver change  in relation to its outcomes .  In this way ,  at the outset before the trial commences ,   it is clear that there  is a  ‘ goldilocks zone ’  in which the SRT can make a difference.  Too little or too much  SARS-CoV-2   infection will reduce the ability of the SRT to work.  It is likely that the  planned  process evaluation with a sample of heterogeneous hospitals may enrich our understanding of the se  parameters of SRT  functionality ."
"76" "Professional and diagnostic  capacity"
"77" "Other contextual dependencies include s ites  having  bioinformatician expertise  and  wider  capacity to manage the logistics of sending samples for sequencing .  Furthermore ,  for the  SRT  to exact i t s anticipated affects, it must be truly rapid   ( produced  within 48 hours  of  a confirmed positive diagnosis  but  even faster  turnaround  times may be needed to maximise effectiveness) .  There also needs to  be a  good degree of   accura cy  in the  sequencing process  facilitated by  established procedures , defined  responsibilities  and effective reporting of errors .   It must have  s ufficient diagnostic  and sequencing capacity to enable the  detect ion of  distinct nosocomial infection s  ( i.e.,  sufficient viral diversity) clustered in time and space  although th i s is communicated in the report as an overall probability rather than per patient ."
"78" "Human resource and capacity"
"79" "Equally,  there must be the physical and human resource to enable the cascade of IPC activities which  the  SRT  may  catalyse .   Physical resources include  PPE, cleaning products  and   indeed wider  physical space  and resource  in hospital s. Human resource  is also vital and  includes the professional and team infrastructure to enact the report,  building on routine healthcare associated infrastructure and processes  with functioning IPC teams, COVID-19 cleaning protocols  and support from the trial  team  as necessary .  As such there are also anticipated contingencies in relation to staff availab ility ,   capacity  and vulnerabilities  particularly as they may  relat e  to staff  absences ."
"80" "3 )  What are the key intervention components of  SRT ?"
"81" "Across the development  work  there was much discussion about the nature and boundaries of the intervention  at the heart of the HOCI  study .   The main  uncertainties related to the  appraisal of three candidate ways of conceptualising the intervention ;  each increasing in complexity  and each associated with higher levels of context dependency . Firstly, the  extent  to  which rapidity of genome sequencing  per se  ( e.g.   allowing  rapid deliver y of  phylogenetic trees)   was the core intervention . Secondly, that  the SRT  as  a  translation tool of rapid genome sequencing  was the intervention .  The third   potential  conceptualisation  of the intervention  was that  the SRT  could be used but in conjunction with a package of dedicated  team work  and  action plans  all  directly connect ing  the  SRT to the  IPC and cleaning teams in a n optimal,  coherent and  pre- specified behavioural chain."
"82" "In relation to the intervention being rapid genome sequencing alone, there was little sense of the intrinsic novelty of this approach, how  it overcame long-standing problems with the translation of genome sequencing insights, or how  fidelity could be assessed, or how we could address  the  major heterogeneity  of existing  sequencing capacity across  the  diverse  study  sites."
"83" "In relation to the third conceptualisation t he team could see the potential importance of focussed work which could optimise the flow of actions resulting from the SRT ( e.g.  ensuring that there were clear and protocolised steps that ensured its information translated into  direct  action). However,  given the context of the pandemic  and the need to  start the trial  quickly,  already stretched staff capacity and resources ,  and the deep heterogeneity of hospitals that could be included within the trial ,  it was  decided that it was  not possible to develop a  complementary  implementation intervention to ensure the SRT was  systematically  translated into action."
"84" "Given these factors t he team agreed that the intervention  should be conceptualised as  the SRT alone . This was reflected clearly within the intervention protocol in contrast to control conditions being described ‘no sequence data’:"
"85" "Definition of intervention within Protocol V 3.0   which received  ethical approval"
"86" "The study intervention is delivery of a  SARS-CoV-2  genomic sequencing data report either:"
"87" "-  within 48 hours from local sequencing hub to the NHS site’s virology lab for dissemination to Infection Prevention and Control (IPC)  teams;"
"88" "- or the same delivered within 5-10 days from centralised sequencing facility"
"89" "The control conditions are described as ‘no sequence data’."
"90" "Overview of the SRT"
"91" "The  SRT   is  sent  from the  sequencing lab  and received by  a nominated individual or team ( typically   the IPC team and consultant virologist )  either  within 48 hours  or 5-10 days  after taking  the sample  (depending on the trial phase) .  Figure 3 shows an SRT.  The report  includes  data visualisation including  a list of close sequence matches from same ward with estimated probability of infection having occurred from a source on the ward ( high or v ery  high when at least one close sequence match present ). A list of close sequence matches from the hospital but not same ward with estimated probability of infection having occurred from a source  elsewhere in the hospital  ( low, moderately low, probable, high, v high ). The estimated probability of infection from a visitor to the ward (low,  moderately low, probable , high, v ery  high). The estimated probability of community-acquired infection (low,  moderately low, probable , high, v ery  high) and a graphical summary  displaying close sequence matches at the ward and hospital levels.  Training is provided to local microbiology and IPC teams to interpret the genome sequencing report. In  addition  the sequence interpretation team (a sub-set of the Trial Team)  are  available  seven  days a week by phone and online to discuss results ,  where required ,  with IP C  teams, and to provide guidance on best practice."
"92" "Figure  4  A n example s  of the  SRT   to show its design and key elements"
"93" "4 )  What are the key causal mechanisms that  the SRT  uses to affect its primary and secondary outcomes?"
"94" "Whilst t he  team agreed that the  SRT  alone represented the best way of conceptualising the intervention at the heart of the HO C I  study , it raised questions concerning how its proximal affects were intended to change the  more distant  primary and secondary trial outcomes.    Whilst this would be one of the key focal points of the subsequent process evaluation the team thought it was important to specify how they were conceptualising these processes before the trial commenced and data collection for the process evaluation began.  These latter causal mechanisms , not concerned with the SRT itself,  are presented under the outcomes section of this paper (RQ5)."
"95" "Overview of the way the SRT is thought to work"
"96" "Our informal discussions and analysis of the CRFs all highlighted that COVID-related IPC and cleaning activity were  typically  overstretched resources and were always happening within hospitals  ( i.e .  they were constant) .  Th ere was no sense that the intervention ,  when compared to  its  control ( i . e.  no sequencing) , could create more IPC or cleaning capacity.   Instead  t hese activities  were ongoing  and  usually  under strain. In contrast  to creating new IPC capacity ,  the SRT was  better thought of  as  being  able to divert, redirect or refocus IPC and cleaning activity in the locations  where it was most needed  and timelines most likely to make a difference to nosocomial incidence."
"97" "Figure 3  (below)  presents a simple visualisation of the way the SRT is intended to work.  In this way, we conceptualised the SRT as having a  catalytic  role in that it could change the intensity and location of on-going activities.  The SRT redirects IPC and cleaning activity away from assumed  nosocomial infections  to  highly probable   nosocomial infections .  This conceptualisation of the SRT as a behaviour change intervention intended to drive changes in on-going IPC and cleaning activity led to the analysis of the SRT using tools from health psychology and the behavioural sciences."
"98" "What theoretical domains does  the SRT  employ?"
"99" "Using the theoretical domains framework our analysis of the SRT (see Table 1 below) highlighted that ‘ knowledge ’ was the most important theoretical domain explicitly employed within the SRT. ‘ Behavioural regulation’  was also particularly important."
"100" "Figure  5  Visualisation of the key function of the SRT  refocusing  the intensity and location of IPC  and cleaning  activities  to  reduce  the  incidence of  nosocomial infection"
"101" "Re-f ocussed IPC and cleaning activity Re-f ocussed IPC and cleaning activity Patterning of COVID-19 through rapid diagnostics  Patterning of COVID-19 through rapid diagnostics  Patterning of COVID-19 through symptomatic patients  Patterning of COVID-19 through symptomatic patients  Apparent H A I S Apparent H A I S"
"102" "Re-f ocussed IPC and cleaning activity"
"103" "Re-f ocussed IPC and cleaning activity"
"104" "Patterning of COVID-19 through rapid diagnostics"
"105" "Patterning of COVID-19 through rapid diagnostics"
"106" "Patterning of COVID-19 through symptomatic patients"
"107" "Patterning of COVID-19 through symptomatic patients"
"108" "Apparent H A I S"
"109" "Apparent H A I S"
"110" "Highly likely HAIS  Highly likely HAIS Apparent H A I S Apparent H A I S"
"111" "Highly likely HAIS"
"112" "Highly likely HAIS"
"113" "Apparent H A I S"
"114" "Apparent H A I S"
"115" "In relation to the TDF,  ‘ Knowledge ’  is central as the SRT is intended to provide superior knowledge of  nosocomial infection  and the time  and location of transmission events than any other available means. ‘ Behavioural regulation’  is also central as the SRT provides objective  retrospective  feedback concerning  recent  IPC and cleaning activities and illuminates where  it is likely (or unlikely)  there ha s  been  transmission of  SARS-CoV-2  within the hospital  to enable focussed  responsive  action in the most appropriate locations."
"116" "A range of less important and  implicit causal mechanisms also used within the SRT  was identified and these included  ‘ professional role and identity’ , ‘optimism’, ‘beliefs about consequences’, ‘memory and decision-making processes’ and ‘social influence’  were also importan t .   Table 1 below  shows our analysis of the SRT in relation to the TDF domains. On the right hand  side  we provide the evidence from the SRT to support our claims of the importance of these theoretical domains."
"117" "Table  1  What are the causal mechanisms the SRT employs to drive changes in intensity of IPC activity"
"118" "Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF) -Key casual mechanisms and brief explanations"
"119" "Analysis of Sequence Reporting Tool (SRT )"
"120" "Domains"
"121" "Explanatory Statement"
"122" "Knowledge"
"123" "A mechanism by which change results from an awareness of the existence of something"
"124" "The design of the SRT is explicitly concerned with communicating knowledge in simple ways that define the occurrence and transmission location of  nosocomial infections  to reduce  their  incidence rate"
"125" "The SRT delivers expert and locally tailored knowledge that is ‘cutting edge’ and  translated to be  meaningful to  its  recipients"
"126" "Occurrence :  In order to  change the intensity  and location  of IPC activities the SRT explicitly provides new knowledge – concerning relative risk of nosocomial  SARS-CoV-2  transmission (vs visitor or community) in current and previously undetected nosocomial infections. For  example  ‘Focus patient’s sequence is closely matched to samples below, possibly linked by transmission’"
"127" "Transmission location :  In order to  change the intensity of IPC activities SRT explicitly provides new knowledge concerning locus of  past  SARS-CoV-2  transmission  events  (within unit, within hospital). For example, ‘matches from same unit; risk of transmission is high’"
"128" "Transmission timing :  In order to  change the intensity of IPC activities SRT  provides explicit new knowledge concerning timing of  SARS-CoV-2  transmissions. For example, details of dates are provided in addition to a visual of the ‘timeline’ that depicts the focus sample and close matches across dates, units and within hospitals providing a visualization of linkage)"
"129" "Skills"
"130" "A mechanism by which changes result from an ability or proficiency acquired through practice"
"131" "No evidence to support the SRT using this causal mechanism"
"132" "Professional roles/identity"
"133" "A mechanism by which changes result from a coherent set of  behaviours  and personal qualities of an individual in a work setting"
"134" "In order to  change the intensity of IPC activities the SRT implicitly evokes the professional role of its recipient(s)"
"135" "Beliefs about capabilities"
"136" "A mechanism by which changes result from an acceptance of the truth or validity of an ability that a person can put to constructive use"
"137" "No evidence to support the SRT using this causal mechanism"
"138" "Optimism"
"139" "A mechanism by which changes result from confidence that things will happen for the best or that desired goals will be obtained"
"140" "In order to change the intensity of IPC activities SRT implicitly creates confidence in  the targeting of  IPC  capacity  to reduce nosocomial  SARS-CoV-2  transmission through its use of  cutting edge  technology"
"141" "Beliefs about consequences"
"142" "A mechanism by which changes result from the acceptance of the truth or validity about outcomes of a  behaviour"
"143" "In order to  change the intensity of IPC activities the SRT implicitly moderates beliefs about consequences of IPC activity in relation to beliefs about culpability/negligence for action/inaction"
"144" "Reinforcement"
"145" "A mechanism by which changes result from increasing the probability of a response by arranging a dependent relationship between the response and a contingency"
"146" "No evidence to support the SRT using this causal mechanism"
"147" "Intentions"
"148" "A mechanism by which changes result from conscious decisions to perform a  behaviour  or act in a certain way"
"149" "No evidence to support the SRT using this causal mechanism"
"150" "Motivation and goals"
"151" "A mechanism by which changes result from the representation of outcome that individual wants to achieve"
"152" "No evidence to support the SRT using this causal mechanism"
"153" "Memory ,  attention  and decision processes"
"154" "A mechanism by which changes result from the ability to retain information, focus selectively, and choose between two or more alternatives"
"155" "In order to  change the intensity of IPC activities, the SRT implicitly influences choices concerning where and when to intensify or stand-down IPC activities  and the design and use of  colour   and graphics focuses attention where it is needed."
"156" "Environmental context and resources"
"157" "A mechanism by which changes result from any circumstances of a situation or environment that discourages/encourages development of skills,  abilities  and competencies"
"158" "No evidence to support the SRT using this causal mechanism"
"159" "Social influences (norms)"
"160" "A mechanism by which changes result from interpersonal processes that can cause individuals to change their thoughts, feelings or  behaviours"
"161" "In order to  change the intensity of IPC activities SRT implicitly uses social influence by publicly and expertly providing knowledge concerning granularity of risk of transmission"
"162" "Emotions"
"163" "A mechanism by which changes result from a complex reaction pattern, involving experiential,  behavioural  and physiological elements"
"164" "No evidence to support the SRT using this causal mechanism"
"165" "Behavioural  regulation"
"166" "A mechanism by which changes result from anything aimed at managing or changing objectively observed or measured actions"
"167" "The SRT as a whole works to change the intensity of IPC  behaviour  using  behavioural  regulation"
"168" "In order to  change the intensity of IPC activities SRT explicitly works to trigger a range of actions ‘please check IPC data, and patient and HCW movement, particularly for the 10-14 days preceding the date of the focus patient’s sample’ . The SRT renders the effectiveness of IPC activities visible and provides a feedback loop that illuminates effective and ineffective IPC work at a detailed level"
"169" "*Italics indicate a more minor theoretical role"
"170" "Which intervention functions does it employ?"
"171" "Table  2 below ,  shows that  the SRT u s es  the  ‘intervention function’ elements of the behaviour change wheel, ‘ education ’, ‘ persuasion ’ and ‘ enablement ’."
"172" "Table  2  Coding the SRT using intervention functions from the  behaviour  change wheel"
"173" "Interventions"
"174" "Definition"
"175" "Education"
"176" "Increasing knowledge or understanding"
"177" "In order to  change the intensity of IPC activities the SRT explicitly provides new knowledge and understanding of HOCIs"
"178" "Persuasion"
"179" "Using communication to induce positive or negative feelings or stimulate action"
"180" "In order to  change the intensity of IPC activities the SRT clearly uses communication of expert  and  locally tailored knowledge to stimulate changes in the intensity of IPC activity"
"181" "Incentivisation"
"182" "Creating expectation of reward"
"183" "Not used in the SRT"
"184" "Coercion"
"185" "Creating expectation of punishment or cost"
"186" "Not used in the SRT"
"187" "Training"
"188" "Imparting skills"
"189" "Not used in the SRT"
"190" "Restriction"
"191" "Using rules to reduce the opportunity to engage in the target  behaviour  (or to increase the target  behaviour  by reducing the opportunity to engage in competing  behaviours )"
"192" "Not used in the SRT"
"193" "Environmental restructuring"
"194" "Changing the physical or social context"
"195" "Not used in the SRT"
"196" "Modelling"
"197" "Providing an example for people to aspire to or imitate"
"198" "In order to  change the intensity of IPC activities the SRT provides a specific prompt to check IPC data and patient and HCW movement"
"199" "Enablement"
"200" "Increasing means/reducing barriers to increase capability or opportunity"
"201" "In order to  change the intensity of IPC activities the SRT clearly minimizes uncertainty to reduce barriers to stimulate focused IPC action"
"202" "Which behaviour change techniques does it employ?"
"203" "Using the BCTT to describe the active behaviour change content of the SRT in the smallest possible terms we found that the SRT uses several BCT groups and individual BCTs to  enact change s in the intensity of  IPC activit ies.  As shown in Table  3  these are drawn from seven of the sixteen behaviour change technique groups."
"204" "Table  3  Individual BCTs and BCT grouping identified within the SRT"
"205" "BCT"
"206" "Definition"
"207" "Evidence  from   SRT"
"208" "Goals and planning"
"209" "1.2 Problem solving"
"210" "Prompt the person to  analyse  factors influencing the behavior and generate or select strategies that include overcoming barriers or facilitators"
"211" "In order to change the intensity of IPC activities the SRT is asking individuals and teams to  analyse  the spatial ( i.e.  unit and ward) and temporal data (i.e. timeline) and wider information concerning the relativity of transmission risk between cases from visitors, community and then select appropriate IPC strategies"
"212" "Feedback and monitoring group"
"213" "2.2 Feedback on  behaviour"
"214" "Monitor and providing informative or evaluative feedback on performance of IPC activities"
"215" "In order to  change the intensity of IPC activities the SRT is providing feedback on  recent  IPC activities"
"216" "2.6 Biofeedback"
"217" "Provide feedback using an external monitoring device as part of a behavior change strategy"
"218" "In order to change the intensity of IPC activities the SRT is providing external monitoring of IPC  behaviour  ( i.e.  the  SARS-CoV-2  genome sequence)"
"219" "2.7 feedback on outcome(s) of  behaviour"
"220" "Monitor and provide feedback on the outcome of performance of IPC activities"
"221" "In order to change the intensity of IPC activities the SRT provides feedback on the outcomes of IPC activities ( e.g.  nosocomial infection)"
"222" "Shaping knowledge   group"
"223" "4.1 instruction on how to perform a  behaviour"
"224" "Advise or agree on how to perform a  behaviour"
"225" "In order to  change the intensity of IPC activities the SRT provides explicit advice ‘please check IPC data and patient and HCW movement, particularly in the 10-14 days preceding the date of the focus patient’s sample’"
"226" "Associations  group"
"227" "7.1 Prompts/Cues"
"228" "Introduce or define environmental or social stimulus with the purpose of promoting or  cuing the  behaviour . The prompt or cue would normally occur at the time or place of the performance"
"229" "In order to change the intensity of IPC activities the SRT and its use of ‘attention signs’ and  colour  prompts change in IPC   activities by providing tailored information within the  organization in which HOCIs  have  occurred   (i.e. hospital)"
"230" "Comparison of outcomes  group"
"231" "9.1 Credible Source"
"232" "Present verbal or visible communication from a credible source in  favour  or against the  behaviour"
"233" "In order to  change the intensity of IPC activities the SRT has HOCI and COG-UK labels and branding and is clearly focused on encouraging targeted IPC activities"
"234" "Antecedents  group"
"235" "12.5 Adding objects to the environment"
"236" "Add objects to the environment to facilitate the performance of the  behaviour"
"237" "The SRT is catalytic in triggering a whole cascade of IPC activities."
"238" "Behavior  change  elements not captured within BCT taxonomy"
"239" "Simple design and lack of complexity"
"240" "In order to  change the intensity of IPC activities the overall design coveys a sense of simplicity and clarity of focus. When multiple SRTs are seen together, other design elements draw attention to where immediate action is needed and where it is not."
"241" "RED COLOUR and bolding"
"242" "In order to  change the intensity of IPC activities the red  colour  and bolding draws the reader’s attention immediately to what is important and significant within the SRT"
"243" "Attention symbols"
"244" "In order to  change the intensity of IPC activities the ‘attention’ draws the reader’s attention to what is most important and significant within the SRT"
"245" "Logos, local tailoring and factual elements of data and IDs  etc"
"246" "In order to  change the intensity of IPC activities the logos, the details of dates and locations and clear connections with trusted local data systems all provide a sense of expert and trusted knowledge."
"247" "What are the key outcomes of the study?"
"248" "O ur conceptualisation of the SRT as  the  intervention and  our  analysis  of its active behaviour change ingredients ( in relation to catalysing changes in the intensity of IPC and cleaning activities )   highlight ed  that the SRT is intended to work through providing superior knowledge concerning the likelihood  and time and location  of nosocomial infection  in the recent past  than  approaches  that do  not  use  sequencing .  T he  SRT provides  objective  novel  feedback and insights into the  recent  functioning of IPC  and cleaning  within the hospital .  As such  there are  a  range of actions and social  processes that may enable the SRT to change the primary and secondary outcomes  ( see Figure  6  for an overview )."
"249" "T his section  (RQ5)   is structured by breaking down the change process initiated by the SRT and theorising them to show the team  thinking about how  the SRT will affect trial outcomes. These  processes  are structured in relation to  i ) those concerning changes to IPC  and cleaning  acti vities  ii) the  broader  level of the hospital system and then iii)  the  anticipated and  potential unintended  outcomes."
"250" "Primary outcomes Incidence rate of HOCIs  Increased identification of nosocomial infection Secondary outcomes Health economic benefit   HCW absence   Unanticipated outcomes  Primary outcomes Incidence rate of HOCIs  Increased identification of nosocomial infection Secondary outcomes Health economic benefit   HCW absence   Unanticipated outcomes  Figure  6  – overview of  change processes and the  trial outcomes"
"251" "Primary outcomes"
"252" "Incidence rate of HOCIs"
"253" "Increased identification of nosocomial infection"
"254" "Secondary outcomes"
"255" "Health economic benefit"
"256" "HCW absence"
"257" "Unanticipated outcomes"
"258" "Primary outcomes"
"259" "Incidence rate of HOCIs"
"260" "Increased identification of nosocomial infection"
"261" "Secondary outcomes"
"262" "Health economic benefit"
"263" "HCW absence"
"264" "Unanticipated outcomes"
"265" "Changes to the hospital Changes to the hospital Changes to the hospital Changes to the hospital"
"266" "Changes to the hospital"
"267" "Changes to the hospital"
"268" "Changes to the hospital"
"269" "Changes to the hospital"
"270" "SRT SRT Secondary outcome Changes to IPC actions Secondary outcome Changes to IPC actions"
"271" "SRT"
"272" "SRT"
"273" "Secondary outcome"
"274" "Changes to IPC actions"
"275" "Secondary outcome"
"276" "Changes to IPC actions"
"277" "Changes to IPC  and cleaning activity:  s ocial processes and dynamics associated with implementation"
"278" "Although the  SRT  is novel, the activities it precipitates are not. The  IPC and cleaning  procedures put in place  as a result of   SARS-CoV-2   are built upon long-standing and well - established processes and procedures established for all health care associated infections (H C AIs). For the work of IPC  and cleaning  teams the protocols for  SARS-CoV-2  are the same  irrespective of whether  they are   informed by the SRT or other approach es .  Here we make explicit  and theorise  our assumptions about the redirection and changing of intensity of IPC and cleaning activities."
"279" "Drawing on  the key concepts of normalisation process theory ,   on one level  the actual work and activities of IPC and cleaning teams will be deeply normalised and identical given an apparent ,  or SRT - identified  nosocomial infection .  However,  we anticipate  the  action s initiated by  the  SRT  may be more complex than this  across the range of trial settings .  We can anticipate the potential of both negative and positive scenarios constraining or enabling the implementation of SRT inspired action.  It is important to consider the diversity of professionals affected by the SRT (from microbiologist to cleaner to bed manager) and question whether   they would know their activities were being shaped by an SRT or not. For those unaware that their workload was shaped by the SRT  we imagine  their activities would be deeply normalised.  Their workload and communication within their management structure may not change  as a result of  the SRT."
"280" "F or people  who do know that their IPC and/or cleaning workload  i s being shaped by the SRT then this might be perceived as   deeply disruptive ,  or perhaps  in contrast,  as   very welcome .   In relation to the negative scenario t he SRT  may  be seen as  exposing,  question ing  expertise, received wisdom and  the effectiveness of recent  activities.  In relation to key NPT concepts,  SRT inspired changes to IPC and cleaning activity  may  be  seen as  lacking coherence  or collective action  as they  run  counter to the  perceptions  of apparent  nosocomial infection and normalised work .  In contrast  to this potential negative scenario,  it may be that local leadership and championship of the SRT can work in the opposite direction ,   ensur ing  cognitive participation in the SRT  inspired actions . In this  scenario   SRT inspired actions  can be seen as  deeply coherent and collective  in relation to normalised IPC and cleaning activities.  These uncertainties  detailed here in relation to  key ways  we imagine  knowledge of the  SRT s role in  affect ing  the work and routines of IPC and cleaning staff  will form a key focus for the process evaluation .   Q uestions of which professionals know about the SRT,  what and  how they think of it ,  and  if and  how they communicate about it within their teams and across the hospital will be of central concern."
"281" "The insights gathered in relation to these issues of implementation will be very useful for the creation of future intervention elements to ensure that SRTs can be optimally positioned within hospital settings and systems."
"282" "System-level mechanisms enabling the intervention to work"
"283" "In relation to considering the way the intervention , the hospital system and the wider  context interact through the lens of complex adaptive systems  (CAS) , several concepts and mechanism are anticipated to be important.  T he SRT is  a relatively modest intervention  that   uses retrospective data to  accelerate ,  focus  and  redirect   the implementation of normative IPC and  cleaning  work already occurring  to reduce future   SARS-CoV-2   infection .   F or it to change the primary and secondary trial  outcomes   however it must exact changes across diverse professionals, settings and across time. In this way it must change the way the hospital   as a whole  is  working. It is in relation to these more ambitious mechanisms that CAS concepts become relevant  to anticipating how the intervention may work ."
"284" "The SRT provides a short-term positive feedback loop  able to improve   IPC and cleaning activities to enable the palpable reduction of nosocomial transmission within site s   (this ‘proximal’ mechanism has already been described  through the use of  ‘behavioural regulation’ within our earlier TDF analysis).   However,  this same mechanism may be amplified  over  a longer  period of  time   as the  hospital may learn much about itself and its activities  in relation to IPC .  This feedback loop concerning the effectiveness of IPC activities may build over time and become reinforced by its own success. In this way, over time, t he hospital  itself  may  change and adapt to  SRT inspired  insights  and  we  can  hypothesise that  the SRT  may well  elicit better planning   and improved HAI management overall. This kind of mechanism is not likely to be observed immediately or in the short term.  G iven the number of inter-dependent agents and processes involved with IPC and patient movement across a hospital ,  CAS concepts suggest that these kinds of  longer term  changes may represent  emergent phenomena   once the hospital reaches a  tipping point .  For example, it may take considerable time for the effects of the SRT to ripple across a ‘resistant’ hospital system  with routinised processes and procedures not ready to accommodate the insights from the SRT. In this way  immediate  SRT inspired  changes in reduced nosocomial infections may not be observed  within the trial period  as the complexity of the hospital  system  produces so much  competing  noise that the signal of the SRT is lost  ( i.e.  its feedback loop enabling the reduction in nosocomial infection) ."
"285" "T he unpredictable nature of the pandemic may moderate the typical challenge of a relatively modest  innovation  ( i.e.  the SRT)  seeking purchase  in an existing complex adaptive system (i.e. the hospital) striving towards stasis (returning to its typical state).  On the o ther   hand  given the degree of hospital disruption caused by  SARS-CoV-2   infection the SRT may gain traction as it is accommodated by  the  new  self-organisation  of the hospital system  as it recovers from  SARS-CoV-2   infection overall  (i . e. enabling the hospital to self-regulate in relation to nosocomial infection).   In contrast it may be that the wider impact of  SARS-CoV-2   infection on the hospital system may make it harder for the SRT to instigate changes to the hospital and its people and processes to accommodate the SRT and its functions."
"286" "These uncertainties will be addressed within the process evaluation where we will focus on understanding the potential reach of the feedback loops the SRT can instigate.   We will try and understand the extent to which the SRT insights flow across the wider hospital and identify key barriers and facilitators to its knowledge flow. We will also focus particularly on how participants think about issues of time in relation to the SRT and the hospital. We will explore how people think of the SRTs retrospective gaze facilitating future changes to IPC and cleaning activities, and how they think the innovation reflected within the SRT is being embedded in processes and aspects of the hospital system  and how these in turn could be scaled up across longer periods of time."
"287" "Key trial outcomes"
"288" "As would be expected from such a complex intervention there are  a number of  anticipated intervention outcomes. Critically in relation to the primary outcomes the intervention is intended to identify nosocomial infection and the time and place of transmission events. In turn this will lead to reduced overall incidence of COVID-19 and within the hospital setting. The intervention will work through enabling the identification of previously undetected nosocomial infection and halting subsequent chains of onwards transmission in a variety of setting s within each hospital . Through reducing further nosocomial  infections  the overall death rate from  SARS-CoV-2   infection  will be reduced."
"289" "In relation to secondary outcomes the targeted IPC work  may  lead to less staff anxiety and less staff time off.  As the report provides tailored information about the patterning of nosocomial infection, it will enable improved planning and improved hospital functioning.  It is unknown whether t he intervention is likely to be cost-effective as  on the one hand  it is primarily concerned with mobilising and effectively targeting existing resource to prevent new COVID-19 infections  but on the other sequencing costs may be novel and will accrue . It is anticipated that the intervention will enable enhanced/targeted contact tracing leading to higher rates of detecting asymptomatic infection."
"290" "In relation to considering the intervention and its ‘dark logic’, the process of developing the programme theory has highlighted  a number of  potential negative consequences. It may be that the rapid sequencing report leads to increases  in other  hospital acquired infections  incidence  beyond those associated with other  SARS-CoV-2   infections   ( e.g.  redirection of IPC capacity away from ‘routine’ non-   SARS-CoV-2   infection   work may be amplified by urgency of rapid sequence demands) . Equally, although in the long term it is anticipated that the intervention will reduce staff anxiety,  illness  and death, it may be that in the short term the reactive urgent response the report engenders is associated with i ncrease s  in staff burn out (particularly IPC team s ) ."
"291" "Furthermore  there  be  may negative consequences relating to the specificity of transmission events that the  SRT  details. These will be realised differently across the agents involved. For example, there may be legal and financial implications concerning allegations of  negligence  for nosocomial infection for  particular hospitals , there may be social and potentially legal implications for individuals in relation to perceptions of culpability, stigma and blame for transmission events.  Finally  there is the potential for the reports to expose behaviours and relationship between people, such as health workers which people may have wanted to remain private."
"292" "Again  these issues will be explored within the process evaluation."
"293" "Discussion"
"294" "In this paper we have reported the process by which we have developed our initial programme theory.  I t is rare for authors to report on this process and to position it within the public domain. Within this paper we have also made explicit our initial programme theory and have provided an account of how we think the SRT will work within the trial context and the larger still unfolding context of the  SARS-CoV-2  pandemic.  We have drawn upon diverse theoretical perspectives to outline key causal mechanism to describe how the intervention will affect its primary and secondary outcomes.  Through  our  iterative conceptual engagement  and team discussions  we have developed our programme theory which suggests that the SRT is the intervention at the heart of the HOCI study. It  translates and communicates rapid genome sequencing to prompt subsequent changes in IPC and cleaning activities.  It uses data from the recent past to affect changes in future IPC and cleaning activities through redirecting limited resource and capacity to where it is likely to be needed most  and make the biggest difference .  Our planned process evaluation work will test these assumptions and provide qualitative data to support or refute our hypotheses.    Our planned process evaluation will also focus on  addressing questions of acceptability, fidelity and adaption, support for the putative causal mechanisms we have identified in addition to exploring the  uncertainties that our programme theory development work has highlighted."
"295" "Our programme theory development work has highlighted  several key challenges. Firstly ,   contextual dependencies relating to the overall prevalence of  SARS-COV-2  are likely to be very important. Too little  SARS-COV-2  and the SRT will likely be of little use as IPC and cleaning capacity is probably optimally focused already. Equally however, too much  SARS-CoV-2  and the hospital system, IPC and cleaning activities, diagnostic and human resource risks being entirely overwhelmed. Secondly, given the relative modesty of the SRT and the comparative enormity and complexity of the hospital system in which it is embedded, it may be difficult to detect a signal of efficacy in the short-term (particularly in the labile context of the unfolding pandemic). Complex  institutions  such as hospitals  function through engrained and obdurate systems and processes many of which are interdependent. Although  we believe  the SRT is highly likely to make intuitive sense to the people who receive it  ( and  indeed  our analysis of its key components all highlight its coherence and likely effectiveness  as a behaviour change intervention) in the short term, in the context of the pandemic, it may fail to gain traction in relation to it having sufficient time to become embedded within these  long standing  interdependent systems and processes.   In this way, the duration and context of the trial in which the SRT is being assessed may be critical considerations in interpreting future trial results."
"296" "The strengths of the current paper relate to its transparent account of how programme theory was developed and its explicit theorisation of key mechanisms that may be important in relation to interpreting trial results and assisting with the structure of the process analysis. We have tried to be clear about where within the process of developing programme theory there  was discussion and debate (for example the boundaries of the intervention) . We have tried to explain our assumptions about the intervention and the way it works in a number of formats from the main narrative account but also through visualisations ( e.g.  the logic model). Other key strengths are our use of diverse theoretical lenses to understand the  effects  of the SRT at multiple levels simultaneously enriching our understanding and interpretation of the intervention within the process evaluation."
"297" "Weaknesses in the study relate to the time frame of the pandemic and to the wider HOCI study. There was no time to explore and understand in detail the IPC and cleaning activities the SRT hopes to moderate. Equally there was no time to assess the needs and preferences of the people in direct receipt of the SRT and shape its design and appearance accordingly. In another non-pandemic context detailed exploratory work would have been conducted to co-produce both the appearance of the SRT and  an optimal approach to co-ordinating the complex chain of people affected by it. It is our hope that the results of the process evaluation will be deeply illuminating in this regard."
"298" "References"
"299" "Atkins L, Francis J, Islam R, O’Connor D,  Patey  A,  Ivers  N, Foy R, Duncan EM, Colquhoun H, Grimshaw JM, Lawton R. A guide to using the Theoretical Domains Framework of behaviour change to investigate implementation problems. Implementation Science. 2017 Dec;12(1):77."
"300" "Bonell  C, Jamal F, Melendez-Torres GJ, Cummins S. ‘Dark logic’: theorising the harmful consequences of public health interventions. J  Epidemiol  Community Health. 2015 Jan 1;69(1):95-8."
"301" "Cane J, O'Connor D, & Michie S. (2012). Validation of the theoretical domains framework for use in behaviour change and implementation research. Implementation Science, 7(37)."
"302" "Coryn  CLS, Noakes LA,  Westine  CD,  Schroter  DC. A systematic review of theory-driven evaluation practice from 1990 to 2009. Am J Eval.  2011;32:199 –226. doi:10.1177/1098214010389321."
"303" "Craig P, Campbell M (2015 )  Evaluability  Assessment: a systematic approach to deciding whether and how to evaluate programmes and policies ."
"304" "Funnell SC, Rogers PJ. Purposeful program theory: effective use of theories of change and logic models. 1st ed. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass; 2011."
"305" "Hoffmann TC,  Glasziou  PP,  Boutron  I, Milne R,  Perera  R, Moher D, Altman DG, Barbour V, Macdonald H, Johnston M, Lamb SE. Better reporting of interventions: template for intervention description and replication ( TIDieR ) checklist and guide.  Bmj . 2014 Mar 7;348."
"306" "Houldcroft , C. J. et al.  Use of Whole-Genome Sequencing of Adenovirus in Immunocompromised  Pediatric  Patients to Identify Nosocomial Transmission and  MixedGenotype  Infection. J Infect Dis 218, 1261-1271, doi:10.1093/ infdis /jiy323 (2018)."
"307" "May C. Towards a general theory of implementation. Implementation Science. 2013 Dec 1;8(1):18."
"308" "MRC 2019 ‘Developing and Evaluating Complex Interventions: Draft of updated guidance’ Draft for consultation."
"309" "Michie S, Van  Stralen  MM, West R. The behaviour change wheel: a new method for characterising and designing behaviour change interventions. Implementation science. 2011 Dec 1;6(1):42."
"310" "Michie S, Richardson M, Johnston M, Abraham C, Francis J,  Hardeman  W, Eccles MP, Cane J, Wood CE. The  behavior  change technique taxonomy (v1) of 93 hierarchically clustered techniques: building an international consensus for the reporting of  behavior  change interventions. Annals of  behavioral  medicine. 2013 Aug 1;46(1):81-95."
"311" "Moore G, Audrey S, Barker M, Bond L,  Bonell  C,  Hardeman  W, Moore L,  O’Cathain  A,  Tinati  T, Wight D, Baird J. Process evaluation of complex interventions. UK Medical Research Council (MRC) guidance. 2014:1-33."
"312" "Murray E,  Treweek  S, Pope C, MacFarlane A,  Ballini  L,  Dowrick  C, et al. Normalisation process theory: a framework for developing,  evaluating  and implementing complex interventions. BMC Medicine. 2010;8(1):63."
"313" "Nilsen P. Making sense of implementation theories, models, and frameworks. Implementation Science 3.0 2020 (pp. 53-79). Springer, Cham."
"314" "O'Cathain  A,  Croot  L, Duncan E, Rousseau N, Sworn K, Turner KM, Yardley L,  Hoddinott  P. Guidance on how to develop complex interventions to improve health and healthcare. BMJ open. 2019 Aug 1;9(8 ):e 029954."
"315" "Radford AD, Chapman D, Dixon L,  Chantrey  J, Darby AC, Hall N. Application of next-generation sequencing technologies in virology. The Journal of general virology. 2012 Sep;93(Pt 9):1853."
"316" "Rogers PJ. Using programme theory to evaluate complicated and complex aspects of interventions. Evaluation. 2008 Jan;14(1):29-48."
"317" "Roy, S. et al. Whole-genome Sequencing Provides Data for Stratifying Infection Prevention and Control Management of Nosocomial Influenza A. Clin Infect Dis 69, 1649-1656, doi:10.1093/ cid /ciz020 (2019)."
"318" "Rutter H, Savona N,  Glonti  K, Bibby J, Cummins S,  Finegood  DT, Greaves F, Harper L,  Hawe  P, Moore L,  Petticrew  M. The need for a complex systems model of evidence for public health. The Lancet. 2017 Dec 9;390(10112):2602-4."
"319" "van  Dorp  L,  Acman  M, Richard D, Shaw LP, Ford CE, Ormond L, Owen CJ, Pang J, Tan CC,  Boshier  FA, Ortiz AT. Emergence of genomic diversity and recurrent mutations in SARS-CoV-2. Infection, Genetics and Evolution. 2020 May 5:104351."
"320" "Wilson T, Holt T, Greenhalgh T.  Complexity  and clinical care.  Bmj . 2001 Sep 22;323(7314):685-8."
"321" "Acknowledgements"
"322" "We would like to thank the HOCI trial management team for their ongoing help and support with this work and to  all of  our expert s  wh o gave their time  and  knowledge as part of our informal discussions about the SRT:  J. Breuer, J. Blackst one, D. Partridge, E. Thomson, A. Holmes,  G.  Nebbia , T.  Galletly , L. Shallcross and M.  Panca"
"323" "Funding statement"
"324" "COG-UK is supported by funding from the Medical Research Council (MRC) part of UK Research & Innovation (UKRI), the National Institute of Health Research (NIHR) and Genome Research Limited, operating as the  Wellcome  Sanger Institute."
"325" "Appendix  1 –   Logic model showing  h ow we anticipate the SRT working to change intended trial outcomes"
"326" "Appendix 2      Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF) -Key casual mechanisms and brief explanations"
"327" "Domains"
"328" "A way of describing the  theoretical mechanisms by which interventions work at a relatively detailed level"
"329" "Explanatory Statement"
"330" "Knowledge"
"331" "A mechanism by which change results from an awareness of the existence of something"
"332" "Skills"
"333" "A mechanism by which changes result from an ability or proficiency acquired through practice"
"334" "Professional roles/identity"
"335" "A mechanism by which changes result from a coherent set of  behaviours  and personal qualities of an individual in a work setting"
"336" "Beliefs about capabilities"
"337" "A mechanism by which changes result from an acceptance of the truth or validity of an ability that a person can put to constructive use"
"338" "Optimism"
"339" "A mechanism by which changes result from confidence that things will happen for the best or that desired goals will be obtained"
"340" "Beliefs about consequences"
"341" "A mechanism by which changes result from the acceptance of the truth or validity about outcomes of a  behaviour"
"342" "Reinforcement"
"343" "A mechanism by which changes result from increasing the probability of a response by arranging a dependent relationship between the response and a contingency"
"344" "Intentions"
"345" "A mechanism by which changes result from conscious decisions to perform a  behaviour  or act in a certain way"
"346" "Motivation and goals"
"347" "A mechanism by which changes result from the representation of outcome that individual wants to achieve"
"348" "Memory and decision processes"
"349" "A mechanism by which changes result from the ability to retain information, focus selectively, and choose between two or more alternatives"
"350" "Environmental context and resources"
"351" "A mechanism by which changes result from any circumstances of a situation or environment that discourages/encourages development of skills,  abilities  and competencies"
"352" "Social influences (norms)"
"353" "A mechanism by which changes result from interpersonal processes that can cause individuals to change their thoughts, feelings or  behaviours"
"354" "Emotions"
"355" "A mechanism by which changes result from a complex reaction pattern, involving experiential,  behavioural  and physiological elements"
"356" "Behavioural  regulation"
"357" "A mechanism by which changes result from anything aimed at managing or changing objectively observed or measured actions"
"358" "*Adapted from Cane  et al.,  2012"
"359" "Appendix 3"
"360" "Intervention  functions"
"361" "A way of describing the key elements by which interventions work  at a high level"
"362" "Education"
"363" "Increasing knowledge or understanding"
"364" "Persuasion"
"365" "Using communication to induce positive or negative feelings or stimulate action"
"366" "Incentivisation"
"367" "Creating expectation of reward"
"368" "Coercion"
"369" "Creating expectation of punishment or cost"
"370" "Training"
"371" "Imparting skills"
"372" "Restriction"
"373" "Using rules to reduce the opportunity to engage in the target  behaviour  (or to increase the target  behaviour  by reducing the opportunity to engage in competing  behaviours )"
"374" "Environmental restructuring"
"375" "Changing the physical or social context"
"376" "Modelling"
"377" "Providing an example for people to aspire to or imitate"
"378" "Enablement"
"379" "Increasing means/reducing barriers to increase capability or opportunity"
"380" "Adapted from  Michie S, Atkins L, West R. The behaviour change wheel. A guide to designing interventions. 1st ed. Great Britain: Silverback Publishing. 2014:1003-10."
"381" "Appendix 4"
"382" "Normalisation  Process Theory –  key causal mechanism and brief explanations  that work at the level of social structures and social process  in  key  settings"
"383" "Construct (n=4)"
"384" "Domain (n=16)"
"385" "Aspirational statement"
"386" "Coherence"
"387" "Differentiation"
"388" "A mechanism by which people   are able to   distinguish  the intervention from current ways of working"
"389" "Communal specification"
"390" "A mechanism by which people   collectively agree  about the purpose of the intervention"
"391" "Individual specification"
"392" "A mechanism by which people  individually understand  what the intervention requires of them"
"393" "Internalisation"
"394" "A mechanism by which people  can  construct potential value  of the intervention for their work"
"395" "Cognitive Participation"
"396" "Initiation"
"397" "A mechanism by which key  individuals drive  the intervention forward"
"398" "Enrolment"
"399" "A mechanism by which people   agree  that the intervention should be part of their work"
"400" "Legitimation"
"401" "A mechanism by which people   buy in to  the intervention"
"402" "Activation"
"403" "A mechanism by which people  can  continue to support  the intervention"
"404" "Collective Action"
"405" "Interactional workability"
"406" "A mechanism by which people  can  perform the tasks  required by the intervention"
"407" "Relational integration"
"408" "A mechanism by which people   maintain their trust  in each other’s work and expertise through the intervention"
"409" "Skill set workability"
"410" "A mechanism by which  the intervention is  appropriately allocated  to participants"
"411" "Contextual integration"
"412" "A mechanism by which the  intervention is  adequately supported  by its host organization"
"413" "Reflexive Monitoring"
"414" "Systematisation"
"415" "A mechanism by which people   are able to   access information  about the effects of the intervention"
"416" "Communal appraisal"
"417" "A mechanism by which people  can  collectively assess  the intervention as worthwhile"
"418" "Individual appraisal"
"419" "A mechanism by which people  can  individually assess  the intervention as worthwhile"
"420" "Reconfiguration"
"421" "A mechanism by which people  can  modify their work  in response to their appraisal of the intervention"
"422" "*Adapted from May, C., Murray, E., Finch, T., Mair, F.,  Treweek , S.,  Ballini , L., Macfarlane, A. and  Rapley , T. (2010) Normalization Process Theory On-line Users’ Manual and Toolkit. Available from http://www.normalizationprocess.org [Accessed on 26th June 2015]."
"423" "Appendix 5"
"424" "Systems science -Key concepts, causal mechanisms and brief explanations  that reflect change processes within complex adaptive systems"
"425" "Key concept"
"426" "Explanatory Statement"
"427" "System boundary"
"428" "A concept used to focus the use of other system concepts"
"429" "Context dependency"
"430" "A concept that draws attention to the intersection and inter-relatedness of intervention elements and the context they are implemented within in"
"431" "Complex"
"432" "A concept used to describe interventions and highlight the interdependence of key intervention components and their causal mechanisms. Often used to contrast with the descriptor ‘complicated’. Complexity is also a description of the systems in which interventions are intended to work"
"433" "Adaptation"
"434" "A central mechanism capturing the idea that systems are typically self- organising  and will adapt to any changes in a direction that returns to stasis, often negating the sustainability of interventions in the long term"
"435" "Positive feedback loop"
"436" "A recursive mechanism in which positive change engenders further positive change (reinforcing). This can be a central feature of a system or a feature of intervention elements"
"437" "Negative feedback loop"
"438" "A recursive mechanism is which positive change engenders the system to return to stasis (self-correcting). This can be a central feature of a system or a feature of intervention elements"
"439" "Self- organising"
"440" "A mechanism, related to ‘adaption’, by which systems respond to changes in un-anticipated ways, so they do not slowly accrue incremental changes  as a result of  the titration of intervention content, and may reorganize along synergistic or adaptive lines in un-anticipated ways"
"441" "Tipping point"
"442" "A mechanism which reflects the point at which a system may radically and even irreversibly change when its propensity for stasis has been exhausted (i.e., a  disproportionate  effect is observed at a critical limit)"
"443" "Non-linear causality"
"444" "A mechanism which highlights the importance of anticipating that intervention outcomes may not be predicted in anticipated ways but instead may be the product of systems dynamics"
"445" "Emergence"
"446" "A mechanism by which simple change at one level, or within one element of a system, may elicit complex patterns and changes to structures across the whole system"
"447" "Statis/resistance"
"448" "A mechanism by which a complex adaptive system strives to return to its original state"
