Complexity, transparency and time pressure:
practical insights into science communication
in times of crisis
Journal of Science Communication, accepted September 2020
Authors : Jana Lasser 1 (1, 2), Verena Ahne (1), Georg Heiler (1), Peter Klimek (1, 2), Hannah
Metzler (1, 2), Tobias Reisch (1, 2), Martin Sprenger (3), Stefan Thurner (1, 2, 3, 4), Johannes
Sorger (1)
Affiliations : (1) Complexity Science Hub Vienna, (2) Medical University Vienna

Abstract
A global crisis such as the Covid-19 pandemic that started in early 2020 poses significant
challenges for how research is conducted and communicated. We present four case studies from
the perspective of an interdisciplinary research institution that switched to “corona-mode” during
the first two months of the crisis, focussing all its capacities on Covid-19-related issues,
communicating to the public directly and via media, as well as actively advising the national
government. The case studies highlight the challenges posed by the increased time pressure, high
demand for transparency, and communication of complexity and uncertainty. The article gives
insights into how these challenges were addressed in our research institution and how science
communication in general can be managed during a crisis.

Introduction
How will the number of infections with the novel SARS-CoV-2 virus develop and when will the
maximum capacity of the healthcare system be reached? How is the population reacting to
governmental countermeasures to curb the spread of the virus? Which regions have an increased
risk of infections? These are only some of the questions that researchers were asked to answer
during the currently ongoing Covid-19 pandemic.
In this practice insight, we present four case studies exemplifying the communication of SARSCoV-2-related research to policymakers, media and the public. The research was conducted at the
Complexity Science Hub Vienna (CSH), a research institution actively engaged in advising the
Austrian government as part of a scientific advisory board during the Covid-19 pandemic.
Researchers at the CSH link state-of-the-art mathematics, modelling, data and computer science
with fundamental questions in various disciplines, such as medicine, economics, ecology, or social
sciences. At the onset of the pandemic in Austria around 14 March, day-to-day research was halted

and the CSH switched to “corona-mode”, directing all research activities to answer questions such
as the ones posed above.
The challenges that arose from the special circumstances of the ongoing pandemic included (i)
sharply increased time pressure and communication frequency, (ii) the need for increased
transparency under the restrictions of data protection and confidentiality, and (iii) the increased
need to communicate complex information, such as statistical uncertainties, while also offering
“easy-to-follow” practical advice. We thereby take into account the reception of our research
results from the perspective of policymakers as well as the media and the general public. We also
discuss the design considerations and tradeoffs regarding the visual aspects of our communication.
Time pressure
Many crises that feature significant direct involvement of researchers to solve imminent problems
are one-off events like earthquakes, where the “critical period” [Stein, 2004] of the disaster is too
short for researchers to engage. Researchers are only involved to help alleviate consequences after
the event has happened or to predict future events. On the other end of the spectrum are longlasting issues such as the HIV-AIDS epidemic or the climate crisis, where the critical period lasts
for years. In both scenarios, there is no excessive time pressure on researchers. In contrast, during
a pandemic, circumstances can change within days and decisions have to be made quickly to take
action and prevent further harm. In this regard, a pandemic is similar to events such as volcanic
eruptions [Haynes et al., 2008], oil spills [Lubchenco et al., 2012; McNutt, 2020], and nuclear
catastrophes [Shore, 2013], which require immediate intervention, leading to intense time pressure
on all involved actors.
Transparency in the context of public attention and confidentiality
During the Covid-19 pandemic, the researchers “on the frontline” were asked to participate in the
publication cycle of broad media outlets to a far greater extent than before the crisis. As a
consequence, the CSH’s science communication rapidly changed from a “science push” scenario
to a “policy (and media) pull” scenario [Bielak et al., 2008, Marcinkowski and Kohring, 2014].
While the CSH continued to publish (push) new results on a webpage dedicated to Covid-19related research [CSH, 2020a], direct requests from the media to comment on current
developments, as well as direct requests for information from policymakers (pull), sharply
increased. There was also a new and intense interest in the scientific process itself, including broad
media reporting about preprints and scientific disputes. This phenomenon of mass media reporting
on communications that are usually intended only for expert audiences could be witnessed on a
global scale; for instance, the discussion in the UK of the simulation of case number predictions
[Boland and Zolfagharifard, 2020] and a discussion in Germany on the viral load of children [Bild,
2020]. As a result of the increased exposure, the origin of information sources used in our research,
such as anonymized mobile phone localization records, was critically questioned by the media, and

transparency was demanded. On the other hand, confidentiality for parts of our results and
information sources was required, for reasons of national security as well as data protection.
Communicating complex information and uncertainty
The scientific process at the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic was characterised by a high degree of
unknowable uncertainty [Chua Chow and Sarin, 2002] in relation to the assessment of risk and
future development of the pandemic. This included the biological parameters of the virus and the
associated disease as well as the most effective strategy to curb its spread. Due to test shortages,
the spread of the virus was also poorly understood. In this context, science had to be
communicated while emphasizing the uncertainty involved in the issue [Fischhoff, 1970].
Policymakers needed to be aware of the uncertainties when making hard choices under time
pressure [Renn, 2010]. The complexity of the information provided and the uncertainty involved
thus made it challenging to satisfy the general demand for practical advice.
We chose the following case studies to exemplify the aforementioned challenges and describe the
strategies we used to overcome them.

(I) Predicting case numbers: communication under time pressure
During the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic in Europe in mid-February to early March 2020, it
was not entirely clear to which extent the public ‒ but also policymakers ‒ understood the gravity
of the situation. Observing the early epidemic growth pattern in Austria for two to three weeks
showed that the increase of the number of confirmed cases could be reasonably approximated by
exponential growth, as is often observed for uncontrolled outbreaks of infectious diseases
[Anderson et al., 1992]. Initially, we observed a doubling time of around 2.3 days. This fact,
together with the assumption that any kind of non-pharmaceutical intervention to curb the spread
of the disease would have an effect with a time delay of one to two weeks, meant that decisions to
implement interventions needed to be taken proactively. While data on infection numbers was
publicly available [Austrian Federal Ministry for Health, 2020a] it was not clear how many
intensive care beds were available for the treatment of severe and critical COVID patients. To
obtain this number, we parsed data from an online resource for hospital bed numbers and their
average occupancy from the Ministry of Health [Austrian Federal Ministry for Health, 2020b].
Extrapolating the observed exponential trend and using available estimates for hospitalization
probabilities [Wang et al., 2020] allowed for a back-of-the-envelope calculation of the point in
time at which the pandemic would overwhelm hospital capacities.
To convey the urgency of the situation, we depicted the projection of hospitalized case numbers
based on historic cases on a standard line plot (see Fig.1). By including “thresholds” of available
beds, the graph thus also illustrated the capacity of the healthcare system, how much of this
capacity remained, and when the thresholds of available hospital beds would be crossed.

Given our assumptions, there were three main sources for uncertainty, namely the (i) observed
growth rate, (ii) available beds, and (iii) probability of hospitalization. Under exponential growth,
even errors of a factor of two in the case numbers would only slightly shift the day on which the
capacity threshold was reached and would not alter our main findings. We therefore decided not to
illustrate this uncertainty for the sake of clarity, but we discuss this limitation in the text. What
remains is the structural uncertainty concerning the assumption of constant exponential growth.
We decided to monitor the growth pattern daily and immediately report deviations from this
assumption.
We made this prediction for Austria within about two days, allowing the time to publish a short
text and a simple graph (see Fig. 1) on Twitter and in a policy brief [CSH, 2020b] as a press
release. We aimed to alert the public to the imminent crisis and urge policymakers to take steps.
Good relations with Austrian science desks helped to successfully disseminate our results.

Figure 1: Initial communication about the projection of case numbers and ICU capacity in
Austria. The graph shows an estimate of the hospitalized infections based on historic case numbers
of the last two weeks at that time (blue dots) and a prediction of hospitalized case numbers for the
coming month (brown line). Horizontal dashed lines indicate the number of available hospital
beds.

As decision-makers noticed this initial communication, they invited the CSH to participate in an
interdisciplinary team of scientists and decision-makers. Decision-makers expected mid- to longterm (a couple of months) predictions on infection numbers. It took a mutual learning process to
help them understand that the expected confidence intervals (i.e., uncertainty) were crucial to
showing the limits of this type of prediction of non-linear processes. We were successful in
communicating to policymakers that only the “when”, not the “if” of our prediction was uncertain:
healthcare capacity would be exceeded eventually if no measures were taken and exponential
growth of cases of infection continued. An additional challenge in this process was that various
teams of researchers contributed to predictions at this point, with different approaches to the
prediction of case numbers and the estimation of confidence intervals. As a result, policymakers
consolidated these approaches to arrive at short-term predictions (over a time horizon of 7‒10
days), which were then communicated to the public [Austrian Federal Ministry for Social Affairs,
2020].
The figures, numbers, and predictions about COVID-19 cases in Austria and daily updates on our
webpage were disseminated by the media without questioning our results or methods.
Nevertheless, we successfully conveyed the uncertainty of our results to media outlets: some
outlets communicated the assumptions underlying the prediction (continued exponential growth)
[APA, 2020b] while others reported the confidence intervals for the point in time at which hospital
capacity would be reached [ORF, 2020a]. All reports communicated that the point in time at
which the healthcare capacity would be exceeded was an approximate and not an exact prediction.
Due to the rapid pace of developments and communication at the beginning of the pandemic,
scientists, as well as journalists, were in danger of producing inaccurate or not well-founded
information. The CSH did not become involved in a controversy about forecasting methods around
the end of April, when an unpublished mathematical paper predicted horrendous numbers of
possible cases in the near future [Hermisson et al., 2020; Metzger, 2020]. The numbers were used
by the Austrian Chancellor in a press conference [Bischof, 2020] that later was labelled as
spreading unnecessary panic [Der Standard, 2020b; ORF, 2020b]. This situation highlighted the
need for internal quality control before publication, which was amplified by the real danger of
causing panic when disseminating results in a misleading way.

(II) Measure effectiveness: Between transparency and data protection
To curb the spread of the virus and slow down the exponential growth in the number of infections
that was showcased in the first case study, the Austrian government implemented
countermeasures. An extensive lockdown was imposed, starting on 16 March, allowing only four
reasons to leave the house: work, if not suspensible, shopping for food and other essential goods,
assisting people in need, and taking short walks. Subsequently, decision-makers were interested in
the level of adherence to the lockdown rules to determine whether even stricter measures, as
imposed e.g. in Spain or northern Italy, would be necessary.

To answer this question, we measured the reduction of population movement (radius of gyration
[Gauvin et al., 2020]) based on mobile phone localization data [Heiler and Reisch, 2020a, 2020b,
2020c; Heiler et al., 2020] (see Fig. 2) and the reduction of the number of passengers passing
through metro stations in Vienna (see Fig. 3). The emphasis was on showcasing the dramatic
change in mobility and on quantifying said reduction. An additional aim of our communication
was to share information about the change in movement patterns with the public, which was
previously provided only to the government by other parties [Bechtold et al., 2020]. We continued
to update the plots regularly throughout the pandemic, especially monitoring the changes around
Easter and 1 May, when the first easing of the lockdown measures took place. By now, similar
data about movement patterns is publicly available for many different countries [Apple, 2020;
Google, 2020].

Figure 2: Relative difference in movement range between March 2nd and March 16th.
In the first days, the CSH missed the opportunity to communicate clearly that it was never in
possession of the raw mobile phone localization data and analysed only aggregates. This became
an issue when an Austrian media outlet asked for data access to create its own visualizations.
When we declared that we could not provide data (instead of stating that we did not have it), the
media outlet commented negatively on the refusal, claiming that the CSH would do “movement
data analyses” “for the federal government” only, but would not share this information with the
public [Addendum, 2020].
The visualizations published by the CSH quantify how mobility has decreased as an effect of the
lockdown, in terms of when (the temporal development), where (geographic variability), and how
much of the population adhered to the imposed restrictions. When restricted to static/noninteractive images, there is a tradeoff as to which parts of this information to convey. In Figure 2,

Figure 3: Relative load of passengers in the Vienna subway, listed per stop, over time between
March 1st and March 24th.
information is temporally aggregated to show the relative difference between movement ranges
between two calendar weeks in the map’s colour channel. Figure 3 displays the relative change in
the passenger load in the Vienna subway system over time. Subway stops (inherently spatial
information) are thereby abstracted to individual lines in the plot.

(III) “Corona Traffic Light”: The complexity of simple communication
From the perspective of healthcare professionals and policymakers, a timely and regional
epidemiological risk assessment tool was essential for an appropriate response during the ongoing
pandemic. Depending on the regional severity and underlying trends, primary care organizations
adopted different modes of risk management. Many public dashboards showing the global spread
of the infection at the time (see for example [John Hopkins University, 2020]) only conveyed
absolute case numbers, while not taking other healthcare-related aspects, such as the availability of
doctors in a region, into account. To accurately judge the severity of the situation across regions,
knowledge about relative regional case numbers was required. To satisfy this requirement, in midApril, we developed the “Corona Traffic Light” as a visual tool for risk communication, which we
published on our webpage for Austria and the world [Sprenger et al., 2020a, 2020b]. It allows the
current regional epidemiological situation in Austria to be communicated to healthcare

professionals, policymakers, and the general public, facilitating the establishment of local
measures.

Figure 4: Overview of the Corna Traffic Light interface. (a) The map is displayed on the
resolution of political districts, colored according to the current risk-level. Levels are described on
a legend (b): green = less than one positively tested person across 10.000 citizens, yellow = less
than ten positively tested, red = more than ten. The time-slider (c) enables a historic perspective of
the situation within the last 30 days. By hovering on a district with the mouse-pointer, the local
trend of the pandemic can be assessed (d). Additional regional information, such as the number of
citizens in risk groups, can be accessed by clicking on a district (e).
We used a commonly understood visual metaphor, i.e. the “traffic light” system with three colours,
to make the visualization easier to grasp [Ziemkiewicz and Kosara, 2008]. We chose the number of
SARS-CoV-2-positive tested cases in the last 14 days (conforming to one incubation period [Lauer
et al., 2020]) per 10,000 citizens as the unit of measurement for describing the regional situation. A
green region conveys that normal life, without (severe) restrictions, is possible. On the other end of
the spectrum, the colour red conveys a high regional infection risk. Cut-off values between the
three levels needed to be chosen carefully to avoid creating a false sense of safety if a region was
coloured green, or panic if a region turned yellow. Based on the feedback of healthcare

practitioners, we defined the cut-off value for the red level as more than 10 SARS-CoV-2 positive
tested cases in the last 14 days per 10,000 citizens. In such regions, severe measures are mandated
to reduce the reproduction number of the virus. A region is yellow if there are between one and ten
positively tested persons per 10,000 citizens. In these areas, measures should be taken according to
the trend of the infection rate, that is, light or severe measures when the rate is decreasing or
increasing, respectively. The trend of the regional temporal development can be queried
interactively by the user (see Fig. 4 d).
While the thresholds for the traffic light colours were curated by healthcare experts, the tool did
not explicitly answer questions such as “How safe is a green zone?”, “How dangerous is a red
zone?”, or “Which kind of countermeasures are appropriate/necessary for each colour?” Such
guidelines needed to be developed by healthcare professionals and policymakers, such that the
“Corona Traffic Light” can be used as a basis for decisions on the implementation of measures
during possible recurring waves of infections.
We featured the Corona Traffic Light on the CSH webpage and through a press release, social
media, and personal contacts to journalists. Its catchy name likely helped in the dissemination
process: it was immediately picked up by the mass media and became the most used tool on the
CSH webpage, and click rates remained high despite decreasing infection numbers.
Healthcare professionals reacted very positively to the visualization. Some health centres started to
develop status reports for their patients based on the tool, which were placed prominently in the
entrance area. Similar to a weather forecast, they informed patients about the current regional and
nationwide situation and the necessary regional preventive measures regarding hygiene, patient
management and usage of protective equipment.
A chapter of the Austrian Economic Chambers considered using the tool to decide which borders
to neighbouring countries could be opened. Between green regions, there was no reason to restrict
travel. However, for this to work, the tool would have to be coordinated and curated on a European
scale. In addition, not all policymakers were enthusiastic about the Corona Traffic Light. Some
raised concerns that it “punished” regions that were testing the most, as these regions would detect
more cases and appear less secure as a consequence. This was an unintended consequence of our
tool.
Similar traffic-light-inspired tools for risk assessment have also surfaced in other countries
[Berlin.de, 2020; risklayer, 2020]. While such tools can be purely descriptive, i.e. without
assigning specific risk levels to thresholds [risklayer, 2020], the Senate of Berlin used the trafficlight system to determine the necessity of countermeasures [Berlin.de, 2020]. However, the
reaction and critique from the media and the public [rbb24, 2020], including attempts to reverseengineer the Senate’s metrics due to a lack of transparency, illustrate the importance of clear
communication regarding data sources and the calculation of risk factors. In July 2020, the

Austrian government announced a government-regulated Corona Traffic Light for risk
management during a potential second wave in autumn [APA, 2020a; Gaigg and Müller, 2020].

(IV) Social media and emotions: between nuanced scientific approaches
and practical advice
As the countermeasures implemented constituted an immense interference into the living
conditions and fundamental rights of the Austrian population, researchers at the CSH quickly
became interested in assessing the sentiment of the population. In the early weeks of the SARSCoV-2 outbreak, we published several reports about the evolution of emotional and social
expressions on Twitter in 2020 in different countries, including Austria (see Figure 5) [Metzler et
al., 2020].

Figure 5: Changes in the percentage of tweets containing at least one emotional or social term on
Twitter compared to the baseline in Austria. A value of zero corresponds to the average level per
weekday in 2019 (baseline). We believe that the marked decline in anger during the time of
lockdown in Austria is caused by the reduction of words referring to violent incidents, such as
robberies or demonstrations and the shift of public discourse towards corona related topics
[Pellert et al., 2020]. This is also supported by reports of drastically decreased criminality in
Austria during the lockdown [Weichhart, 2020].

Next, we built an online emotion monitor that was automatically updated daily [Pellert et al., 2020]
based on text data from Twitter, the online discussion forum of a major Austrian newspaper, and a
chat platform for young adults. In the initial reports on the CSH website, we focused on increases
in expressions of anxiety (the most relevant collective emotion in response to a threat) and
prosocial attitudes (a positive aspect of the public response). In these reports, we also included
recommendations for psychological health and links to reliable information sources about SARSCoV2. We further investigated changes in anger, sadness, positive emotions, and social terms such
as “family” or “help”, and presented these results via the online monitor, interviews with
journalists, and presentations to policymakers.
The most difficult tradeoff in visualizing emotion timelines concerned the advantages and
disadvantages of showing absolute compared to relative percentage values of emotional
expressions. Showing absolute values, on the one hand, helps to accurately interpret the extent of a
change in relation to the base rate, but does not allow comparison between different countries and
languages, which readers intuitively make nonetheless. Relative percentages, on the other hand,
account for irrelevant differences in the baseline levels and thus allow comparisons, but easily lead
to overestimating the importance of a change if the base rate is low. Eventually, we chose relative
percentages to prevent misinterpretations of differences in baselines that depended only on small
differences in the emotion measures for different languages. To allow readers to interactively
explore the figures in the online reports and monitor (zoom, look at specific dates or values), we
compiled figures with the R package Plotly [Plotly Technologies Inc., 2015].
We sent a short description of our social media analysis to all CSH press contacts, informed the
Austrian Press Agency (science desk) in a personal telephone call, and shared some results via
Twitter and Facebook. We did not publish these reports for a specific purpose other than allowing
the public to reflect on their own emotional experiences. Nevertheless, they quickly caught the
attention of policymakers looking for advice regarding measures against the outbreak.
Participating in the COVID-19 Future Operations Clearing Board (an interdisciplinary platform for
exchange between researchers and politicians initiated by the Austrian Federal Chancellery), we
realized that social media analyses may satisfy policymakers’ need for up-to-date results, but
cannot provide direct recommendations for political decisions. As politicians focused on
recommendations and direct answers to questions about the degree of acceptance or psychological
consequences of measures, we realized the importance of communicating the limited conclusions
that a particular analysis allows.
Our results were featured by the Austrian Press Agency, and consequently in several online
newspapers, including Der Standard, Science.ORF.at, and Wiener Zeitung [Der Standard, 2020a;
science.ORF.at, 2020; Wiener Zeitung Online, 2020]. Early reports by science journalists
demonstrated that we had successfully communicated a nuanced interpretation of our results,
including potential misunderstandings. Later media requests were mostly interested in people’s
opinions about the measures, exciting novel results or results that confirmed journalists’

expectations. We insisted on cautious interpretations and actual empirical evidence by
emphasizing, for instance, that our results capture only emotional expressions, not emotions
themselves, or by clarifying that expressions of anger remained below the baseline for three
months in a row after the onset of the pandemic, despite increasing criticism of measures in the
media. As a result, these later interviews (e.g. with Puls 4, Die Presse, Focus) were never
published. This highlights a real tradeoff between capturing the attention of the media and the
public and achieving an accurate and nuanced presentation of scientific results.

Lessons learned from communicating science in times of crisis
In the following, we discuss strategies on how to deal with the three challenges that we defined in
the course of this paper: time pressure, transparency, and communicating complex information,
and that were illustrated in our case studies. A brief summary of the insights described in this
article in the form of practical guidelines can be found as a supplementary text.
Dealing with time pressure
One way to tackle the increased time pressure of the short cycles between receiving, evaluating,
and presenting insights gained from new information is to break down scientific questions and
results into smaller units, or to establish continuous reporting outlets in the form of monitors. This
strategy is especially feasible when monitoring and communicating daily changes, such as case
numbers [Sprenger et al., 2020], movement patterns [CSH, 2020a] and population sentiment
[Pellert et al., 2020] to inform decision-makers and the public in real time.
In these cases, communication and dissemination are facilitated and become more effective, i.e.
better received and understood, if message content and format adhere to common standards
[Ziemkiewicz and Kosara, 2008]. Governmental agencies such as the CDC in the USA have
developed crisis-communication strategies for catastrophic events [Dalrymple et al., 2016;
Reynolds et al., 2008, 2005]. Like these agencies, research institutions should become aware of the
potential impact of their area of expertise in times of crisis and develop crisis-communication
strategies accordingly. They should be prepared to quickly transition from a “science push” to a
“policy pull” [Bielak et al., 2008] mode of communication in times of crisis and have a clear plan
for communication responsibilities and workflow. Implementing such a plan also has the potential
to lower the time spent on coordinating the communication. The plan should also include the legal
aspects of handling sensitive data such as patient health records or mobile phone data. Clarifying
these aspects during a crisis takes significant amounts of time and severely hampers
communication.
Next to a “crisis strategy”, another remedy to produce correct results with fewer means for quality
control is to involve as many colleagues as possible in the scientific and modelling process to
mimic an informal “review process” under stress. A necessary means for this is more efficient
internal communication. During “corona-mode” at the CSH, the use of a central communication
platform (Slack) was enforced, which facilitated sharing and discussing information in an

internally transparent way. At the same time, daily group calls offered the possibility to ask peers
for internal review and proofreading of results and methods and to spot the potential for
misunderstandings of the communication.
Such quality checks could also be made transparent to decision-makers and the public to foster
trust. Nevertheless, the reduced time for debate most certainly results in lower-quality output, and
the risk that scientists lose their most valuable good – reputation – is high. By employing the
highest standards of transparency and proactive communication of uncertainties, this risk can be
minimized to some extent.
Managing transparency
Throughout the Covid-19 pandemic, we perceived an increased interest of the public in the
scientific process. The crisis has shown that transparency of the scientific process is increasingly
being demanded by the public and is needed to quickly share and discuss results and methods
among experts and policymakers. Communicating the entire scientific process, including the
context as well as the methods and data used for research, is becoming increasingly important in
communication to non-experts as well.
Surveys conducted during the crisis show a sharp increase of trust in science and scientists
[Carrell, 2020; Wissenschaft im Dialog, 2020], which also results in acceptance and adoption of
protective measures [Dohle et al., 2020]. This is in line with previous reports of the perception of
scientists as a trustworthy source of information during a crisis [Haynes et al., 2008]. Therefore,
next to the challenges, the Covid-19 pandemic also offers the unique opportunity to strengthen the
role of science in public discussions and future policy decisions through proactive and transparent
communication and to inform the public about the scientific process.
However, if results are still in the making, if solid conclusions are not yet possible, or if the
refereeing process is not yet completed, the question of how scientists should communicate
transparently remains open. Should scientists discuss their doubts openly in public ‒ risking stress
from public exposure ‒ or should they involve only decision-makers in the discussion?
For the Covid-19 pandemic, there is evidence that the presence of corrective information helps to
debunk misinformation [Meer and Jin, 2020] and to increase compliance with measures
[Hameleers et al., 2020]. This indicates that the public should be transparently informed about the
current state of affairs and be involved in the ongoing discussion of policy decisions, and can be
trusted to act cooperatively and intelligently. Still, both approaches – complete transparency and
holding back results until they have been subject to rigorous quality checks – are valid in certain
circumstances and need to be balanced in crisis communication.
To strike this balance in practice, we established an internal review system to ensure results were
checked by several researchers before they were communicated to the public. Additionally, we
aimed to publish the data, methods and source code underlying our results wherever legally
possible.
In the current Covid-19 pandemic, both policymakers and scientists had access to the relevant
information and engaged in communication with the public. In our experience, policymakers tend

to resort to streamlined communication that emphasizes confidentiality and is designed to persuade
the population to comply with measures. This leaves the role of the “transparency creators” to the
scientists, who must balance the political communication in times of crisis. While this comes with
a high additional time cost and a potential risk to reputation, we think it is the responsibility of
scientists to take this role and to proactively publish the maximum possible amount of information
to create transparency wherever legally possible ‒ as we did with our analysis of movement
patterns during the crisis.
In the context of Open Science, publishing preliminary results in the form of preprints, data and
methods has gained considerable traction in the scientific community during the last years in the
interests of fostering research reproducibility and integrity [Fidler and Wilcox, 2018; Munafò,
2016]. During times of crisis, Open Science practices create transparency and can help improve
trust. To this end, adopting Open Science workflows in everyday scientific work facilitates
transparent communication in times of crisis and lowers the additional strain on limited time
resources incurred by getting used to new practices during times of crisis. Here, an important
aspect is also a clear description of the exact nature and source of data sets that are used –
especially when sensible data sets are analysed. To this end, we included extensive information
about data sources and data processing in the disclaimers accompanying both the Corona Traffic
Light and the emotion monitor.
Communicating complex information
When communicating scientific results or processes, the message has to be tailored to the target
audience - this holds true for visual as well as verbal communication. This curation of a message
concerns not only the degree of detail and complexity conveyed, but also the tone of the message.
Extreme and careless reporting has the potential to incite fear and can be used by the tabloid press
to create the impression of chaos and incompetence [Bild, 2020], which no scientist wants to be
associated with. This also places additional strain on the researcher’s time to clarify
misunderstandings and debunk false results. Still, the hypothesis of “disaster panic”, which
assumes that in emergencies people will give in to mass hysteria, has been disproven by disaster
experts in the last decades [Gantt and Gantt, 2012; Auf der Heide, 2004; Sandman and Lanard,
2005]. Historical evidence also points to groundswells of organized and prosocial behaviour during
and after disasters [Bernardini and Hart, 2011; Fritz and Williams, 1957; Grimm et al., 2014; Zaki,
2020]. This strengthens our conviction to be transparent and trust the public with information, even
if it is uncomfortable. Nevertheless, researchers should never compromise on the communication
of uncertainty – even when the demand for simple answers and clear advice is high, as was the
case for the prediction of case numbers and the monitoring of public sentiment.
While visual communication can help to foster the dissemination of research results in a way that
is easy to understand intuitively, careless design decisions can have the opposite effect. If counterintuitive encodings are chosen or if the information is presented in a way that is too complex for
the target audience to grasp, results can be misinterpreted. It is therefore important to double-check
whether the intended message was received, which is challenging under time pressure. In the case

of the emotion monitor, we tried to predict possible sources of misunderstanding by the users
beforehand and carefully chose the visualizations accordingly. The Corona Traffic Light was
shown to several healthcare practitioners to aid with streamlining metrics and representation before
going public.
Another aspect to consider is the tradeoff between the simplicity of a message and its
completeness. An oversimplified presentation could be prone to false interpretation due to missing
information, while a presentation overloaded with details can be overwhelming even for expert
audiences. In the case of the Corona Traffic Light, the colours send a clear message thanks to the
familiar metaphor. However, the way the data was aggregated was confusing for some users. The
temporal aggregation over two weeks was perceived as arbitrary by some, although it was based
on the maximal incubation period of the virus. The use of fractions (one case per 10,000
inhabitants) was confusing when representing less than one inhabitant. This shows how important
it is to keep the information simple if it is targeted at a broader public. Conversely, simplification
always poses the risk of omitting relevant information: the omission of testing rates in a region
allowed for misinterpretation of infection risk based solely on infection numbers.
The tradeoff between simplicity and completeness can also be remedied by giving users dynamic
control over the visualization if it is hosted in an interactive format – as was the case for the
Corona Traffic Light and the emotion monitor. Interactive elements can include, for example,
different threshold specifications, or changing the temporal aggregation window and the
information included in the display.
Another challenge is the visual communication of uncertainty, which can make an already
complex message less clear and less understandable. “As little as possible, as much as necessary”
[Ware, 2019] is the guideline here, but it is not always straightforward to follow. Another way to
deal with this tradeoff is to provide multiple static representations, conveying the same topic with
increasing complexity. Similar to an interactive website representation, interested audiences thus
can delve deeper into a topic, to a level that matches their interest and/or expertise.
Trust and transparency can also be an issue in visual communication, even if a visualization
conveys only raw data (where does the data come from?), but especially when the displayed results
stem from data transformations (how were the results calculated?). In such cases, it is essential to
reference sources and methods in accordance with the Open Science spirit. This is why we
included extensive disclaimers in our reporting of movement patterns and public sentiment and the
Corona Traffic Light.
The research-related aspects of the Covid-19 pandemic illustrated in our case studies (case number
prediction, assessment of measure effectiveness, visualization of infection risk and investigation of
public sentiment) are not specific to Austria, as similar research efforts are currently being
undertaken in many countries around the world. Therefore, while the case studies presented in this
publication are, in their concrete application, specific to Austria, we believe that the insights into
science communication during a time of crisis can be generalized to other countries and settings.
To this end, we have compiled a short practical guide [Lasser, 2020] based on what we have

learned as well as a compilation of all relevant references and online resources pertaining to the
four case studies (see supplemental material), in the hope that it can facilitate the preparedness of
other research institutions for a crisis.

Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Wiener Wissenschafts-, Forschungs- und Technologie Fonds
projects #COV20-017 “Tagesaktuelle Coronalagekarte” and #MA16-045, the Vienna Science and
Technology Fund project #VRG16-005, and the Österreichische Forschungsförderungsgesellschaft
project #873927 and FWF project #P29032 .
We thank Wolfgang Knecht and Martin Knecht for their work on the Corona Traffic Light, and
Max Pellert and David Garcia for setting up the Online Emotion Monitor, and Jenny Reddish for
language editing of the manuscript.

References
Addendum. (2020). “Standortdaten: Wo das öffentliche Leben zurückkehrt” . Retrieved June 23,
2020, from Addendum website: https://www.addendum.org/coronavirus/standortdatensocial-distancing/
Anderson, R. M., & May, R. M. (1992). “Infectious Diseases of Humans: Dynamics and Control.”
Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.
APA. (2020a). “Probebetrieb für Corona-Ampelsystem startet Mitte August.” Die Presse.
Retrieved from https://www.diepresse.com/5845928/probebetrieb-fur-coronaampelsystem-startet-mitte-august
APA. (2020b). “Forscher rechnen mit Engpass an Spitalsbetten Anfang April.” Die Presse.
Retrieved from https://www.diepresse.com/5783559/forscher-rechnen-mit-engpass-anspitalsbetten-anfang-april
Apple. (2020). “COVID-19 – Berichte zu Mobilitätstrends.” Retrieved August 13, 2020, from
Apple website: https://www.apple.com/covid19/mobility
Auf der Heide, E. (2004). “Common Misconceptions about Disasters: Panic, the ‘Disaster
Syndrome,’ and Looting.” In The First 72 Hours: A Community Approach to Disaster
Preparedness (pp. 340–381). Retrieved from
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/emergency_response/common_misconceptions.pdf
Austrian Federal Ministry for Health. (2020a). “Amtliches Dashboard COVID19.” Retrieved June
17, 2020, from https://info.gesundheitsministerium.at/

Austrian Federal Ministry for Health. (2020b). “Klinksuche.” Retrieved June 17, 2020, from
https://kliniksuche.at/
Austrian Federal Ministry for Social Affairs. (2020). “COVID-Prognose-Konsortium.” Retrieved
June 18, 2020, from
https://www.sozialministerium.at/Informationen-zum-Coronavirus/COVID-PrognoseKonsortium.html
Bechtold, F., Prenner, T., & Dax, P. (2020). “Ausgangsbeschränkung: A1 liefert Bewegungsdaten
an Regierung.” Retrieved June 23, 2020, from
https://futurezone.at/netzpolitik/ausgangsbeschraenkung-a1-liefert-bewegungsprofile-anregierung/400783565
Berlin.de. (2020). “Corona-Ampel: Die aktuellen Indikatoren.” Retrieved June 23, 2020, from
https://www.berlin.de/sen/gpg/service/presse/2020/pressemitteilung.948468.php
Bernardini, S., & Hart, D. (2011). “A paradise built in hell: the extraordinary communities that
arise in disaster.” Journal of Moral Education, 40(1), 123–125.
https://doi.org/10.1080/03057240.2011.541774
Bielak, A. T., Campbell, A., Pope, S., Schaefer, K., & Shaxson, L. (2008). “From Science
Communication to Knowledge Brokering: the Shift from ‘Science Push’ to ‘Policy Pull.’”
In D. Cheng, M. Claessens, T. Gascoigne, J. Metcalfe, B. Schiele, & S. Shi (Eds.),
Communicating Science in Social Contexts (pp. 201–226). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-14020-8598-7_12
Bild. (2020). “Kritik an Star-Virologe Drosten: „Wir empfehlen, die Studie zurückzuziehen“.”
bild.de. Retrieved from https://www.bild.de/politik/inland/politik-inland/kritik-an-starvirologe-drosten-wir-empfehlen-die-studie-zurueckzuziehen-70884902.bild.html
Bischof, D. (2020). “Kurz: ‘Die Ruhe vor dem Sturm.’” Wiener Zeitung. Retrieved from
https://www.wienerzeitung.at/nachrichten/politik/oesterreich/2055993-Regierung-ziehtCorona-Bilanz.html
Boland, H., & Zolfagharifard, E. (2020). “Coding that led to lockdown was ‘totally unreliable’ and
a ‘buggy mess’, say experts.” The Telegraph. Retrieved from
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/2020/05/16/coding-led-lockdown-totallyunreliable-buggy-mess-say-experts/
Carrell, S. (2020). “Trust in scientists grows as fake coronavirus news rises, UK poll finds”. The

Guardian. Retrieved June 17, from https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/may/05/trustin-scientists-grows-as-fake-coronavirus-news-rises-uk-poll-finds
Chua Chow, C., & Sarin, R. K. (2002). “Known, Unknown, and Unknowable Uncertainties.”
Theory and Decision, 52(2), 127–138. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1015544715608
CSH. (2020a). “CSH COVID19 Info Point.” Retrieved June 17, 2020, from
https://csh.ac.at/covid19/
CSH. (2020b). “Coronavirus: Kapazitäten bei Spitalsbetten - CSH.” Retrieved June 12, 2020, from
https://www.csh.ac.at/csh-policy-brief-coronavirus-kapazitaetsengpaesse-spitalsbetten/
Der Standard. (2020a). “Coronavirus: Twitter spiegelt Ängste und Sorgen der Menschen wider”.
DER STANDARD. Retrieved June 9, 2020, from
https://www.derstandard.at/story/2000115973796/coronavirus-twitter-spiegelt-aengsteund-sorgen-der-menschen-wider
Der Standard. (2020b). “Sitzungsprotokoll der ‘Taskforce Corona’ über zu wenig Angst in der
Bevölkerung.” DER STANDARD. Retrieved June 9, from https://www.derstandard.at/story/
2000117131591/sitzungsprotokoll-der-taskforce-corona-ueber-zu-wenig-angst-in-der
Dohle, S., Wingen, T., & Schreiber, M. (2020). “Acceptance and Adoption of Protective Measures
During the COVID-19 Pandemic: The Role of Trust in Politics and Trust in Science”.
Preprint in Open Science Framework. https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/w52nv
Fidler, F., & Wilcox, J. (2018). “Reproducibility of Scientific Results.” In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2018). Retrieved from
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2018/entries/scientific-reproducibility/
Fischhoff, B. (1970). “Communicating Uncertainty: Fulfilling the Duty to Inform | Issues in
Science and Technology.” Retrieved June 17, 2020, from https://issues.org/fischhoff/
Fritz, C. E., & Williams, H. B. (1957). “The Human Being in Disasters: A Research Perspective.”
The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 309(1), 42–51.
https://doi.org/10.1177/000271625730900107
Gaigg, V., & Müller, W. (2020). “Risikoabwägung im Sommer und Herbst durch Corona-Ampel
und Reisewarnungen.” DER STANDARD. Retrieved from
https://www.derstandard.at/story/2000119222309/risikoabwaegung-im-sommer-und-imherbst-durch-corona-ampel-und
Gantt, P., & Gantt, R. (2012). “Disaster Psychology: Dispelling the Myths of Panic.” Professional

Safety, 42–49.
Gauvin, L., Tizzoni, M., Piaggesi, S., Young, A., Adler, N., Verhulst, S., … Cattuto, C. (2020).
“Gender gaps in urban mobility.” Humanities and Social Sciences Communications, 7(1),
1–13. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0500-x
Google. (2020). “COVID-19 Community Mobility Report.” Retrieved August 13, 2020, from
COVID-19 Community Mobility Report website:
https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility?hl=de
Grimm, A., Hulse, L., Preiss, M., & Schmidt, S. (2014). “Behavioural, emotional, and cognitive
responses in European disasters: results of survivor interviews.” Disasters, 38(1), 62–83.
https://doi.org/10.1111/disa.12034
Haynes, K., Barclay, J., & Pidgeon, N. (2008). “The issue of trust and its influence on risk
communication during a volcanic crisis.” Bulletin of Volcanology, 70(5), 605–621.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00445-007-0156-z
Heiler, G., & Reisch, T. (2020a). “Corona | Wirksamkeit der Massnahmen [März] - CSH.”
Retrieved August 24, 2020, from https://www.csh.ac.at/coronavirus-wirksamkeit-dermassnahmen-in-oesterreich/
Heiler, G., & Reisch, T. (2020b). “Corona | How measures work [April] - CSH.” Retrieved August
24, 2020, from https://www.csh.ac.at/coronavirus-how-measures-work-wirksamkeit-dermassnahmen-oesterreich-april/
Heiler, G., & Reisch, T. (2020c). “Corona | How measures work [May] - CSH.” Retrieved August
24, 2020, from https://www.csh.ac.at/coronavirus-how-measures-work-wirksamkeit-dermassnahmen-oesterreich-may/
Heiler, G., Reisch, T., Hurt, J., Forghani, M., Omani, A., Hanbury, A., & Karimipour, F. (2020).
“Country-wide mobility changes observed using mobile phone data during COVID-19
pandemic.” ArXiv:2008.10064 [Cs, Stat]. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/2008.10064
Hermisson, J., Nordborg, M., Grohs, P., & Schachermayer, W. (2020). “Über Modelle, Prognosen
und die Realität von Covid-19.” Falter. Retrieved from
https://www.falter.at/zeitung/20200429/ueber-modelle-prognosen-und-die-realitaet-voncovid-19
John Hopkins University. (2020). “COVID-19 Map.” Retrieved June 22, 2020, from Johns
Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center website: https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html

Lasser, J. (2020). “A practical guide for the organization of science communication of a research
institution during a crisis.” https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/UG4FK
Lubchenco, J., McNutt, M. K., Dreyfus, G., Murawski, S. A., Kennedy, D. M., Anastas, P. T., …
Hunter, T. (2012). “Science in support of the Deepwater Horizon response.” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(50), 20212–20221.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1204729109
Marcinkowski, F., & Kohring, M. (2014). “The changing rationale of science communication: a
challenge to scientiﬁc autonomy.” Journal of Science Communication, 13(3), 8.
https://doi.org/10.22323/2.13030304
McNutt, M. (2020). “Delivering Science in a Crisis | Issues in Science and Technology.” Retrieved
June 17, 2020, from https://issues.org/mcnutt-actionable-strategic-irreplaceable-datadelivering-science-in-a-crisis/
Meer, T. G. L. A. and Jin, Y. (2020). “Seeking Formula for Misinformation Treatment in Public
Health Crises: The Effects of Corrective Information Type and Source.” Health
Communication, 35(5), 560–575. https://doi.org/10.1080/10410236.2019.1573295
Metzger, I. (2020). “Expertenpapier zu Corona: „100.000 zusätzliche Tote“ sind möglich.” Kurier.
Retrieved from https://kurier.at/politik/inland/expertenpapier-zu-corona-100000zusaetzliche-tote-sind-moeglich/400801484
Metzler, H., Rimé, B., & Garcia, D. (2020). “Expressions of emotions and social behavior around
COVID19 on Twitter in different countries.” Retrieved June 18, 2020, from
https://csh.ac.at/covid19/twitter/
Munafò, M. (2016). “Open Science and Research Reproducibility.” Ecancermedicalscience, 10.
https://doi.org/10.3332/ecancer.2016.ed56
ORF. (2020a). “Intensivbetten-Kapazität reicht noch 14 Tage.” Retrieved August 11, 2020, from
science.ORF.at website: https://science.orf.at/stories/3200192/
ORF. (2020b). “Regierungskommunikation: Aufregung über kolportierte Angststrategie.”
Retrieved June 22, 2020, from news.ORF.at website: https://orf.at/stories/3163480/
Pellert, M., Lasser, J., Metzler, H., & Garcia, D. (2020). “Dashboard of sentiment in Austrian
social media during COVID-19.” Frontiers in Big Data, 3.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fdata.2020.00032
Plotly Technologies Inc. (2015). “Collaborative data science.” Retrieved from https://plot.ly.

rbb24. (2020). “Das ist die Corona-Ampel – mit all ihren Schwierigkeiten.” Retrieved June 23,
2020, from https://www.rbb24.de/panorama/thema/2020/coronavirus/beitraege_neu/
2020/05/corona-ampel-infektionen-berlin.html
Renn, O. (2010). “Risk Communication: Insights and Requirements for Designing Successful
Communication Programs on Health and Environmental Hazards.” In Handbook of risk
and crisis communication (pp. 80–98). Routledge.
risklayer. (2020). “Risk layer explorer.” Retrieved June 23, 2020, from http://www.risklayerexplorer.com/event/100/detail
Sandman, P., & Lanard, J. (2005). “Tsunami Risk Communication: Warnings and the Myth of
Panic (Peter Sandman/Jody Lanard column).” Retrieved June 22, 2020, from
https://www.psandman.com/col/tsunami1.htm
science.ORF.at. (2020). “Online-Emotionen: Mehr Trauer als Wut.” Retrieved June 9, 2020, from
science.ORF.at website: https://science.orf.at/stories/3200583/
Shore, R. (2013). “Lessons from Fukushima: scientists need to communicate better.” Bulletin of
the World Health Organization, 91(6), 396–397. https://doi.org/10.2471/BLT.13.030613
Sprenger, M., Sorger, J., Knecht, W., & Knecht, M. (2020a). “CSH Corona Traffic Light Global.” Retrieved August 24, 2020, from https://vis.csh.ac.at/corona-traffic-light/world/
Sprenger, M., Sorger, J., Knecht, W., & Knecht, M. (2020b). “CSH Corona Traffic Light Austria.” Retrieved June 12, 2020, from https://csh.ac.at/covid19/corona-ampel/#
Stein, M. (2004). “The critical period of disasters: Insights from sense-making and psychoanalytic
theory.” Human Relations, 57(10), 1243–1261. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018726704048354
Wang, D., Hu, B., Hu, C., Zhu, F., Liu, X., Zhang, J., … Peng, Z. (2020). “Clinical Characteristics
of 138 Hospitalized Patients With 2019 Novel Coronavirus–Infected Pneumonia in Wuhan,
China.” JAMA, 323(11), 1061. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.1585
Weichhart, J. (2020). “Kriminalität sinkt durch Corona: „Harte Zeiten für Einbrecher“.” Retrieved
from https://kurier.at/chronik/oesterreich/kriminalitaet-sinkt-durch-corona-harte-zeitenfuer-einbrecher/400791605
Wiener Zeitung Online. (2020). “Gefühle und Videokonferenzen - Wiener Komplexitätsforscher
finden bei Online-Emotionen nach einem deutlichen Anstieg zu Beginn der Krise nun
weniger Ängstlichkeit.” Retrieved June 9, 2020, from
https://www.wienerzeitung.at/nachrichten/wissen/mensch/2057851-Gefuehle-und-

Videokonferenzen.html
Wissenschaft im Dialog (2020). “Wissenschaftsbarometer Corona Spezial”. Wissenschaft im
Dialog. Retrieved June 17, 2020 from
https://www.wissenschaft-im-dialog.de/projekte/wissenschaftsbarometer/
wissenschaftsbarometer-corona-spezial/
Zaki, J. (2020). “Catastrophe Compassion: Understanding and Extending Prosociality Under
Crisis.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2020.05.006
Ziemkiewicz, C., & Kosara, R. (2008). “The Shaping of Information by Visual Metaphors.” IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 14(6), 1269–1276.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2008.171

