Lifting the lockdown: what are the options for low and
middle-income countries?

Rajiv Chowdhury*1, PhD; Shammi Luhar*1, PhD; Nusrat Khan*1, MSc; Sohel Reza Choudhury2,
PhD; Imran Matin3, PhD; and Oscar H Franco4, PhD.

1. Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.
2. National Heart Foundation and Research Institute, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
3. BRAC Institute for Global Development, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
4. Institute for Preventive and Social Medicine, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

*Contributed equally.
Word count:1985; One Figure.

Correspondence to: Dr Shammi Luhar
Department of Public Health and Primary Care
University of Cambridge
Strangeways Research Laboratory
Cambridge, CB1 8RN, United Kingdom
Email: sl989@medschl.cam.ac.uk

ABSTRACT
To limit the social, economic and psychological damage caused by strict social distancing
interventions, many low and middle-income countries (LMICs) are seeking to ease restrictions.
However, it is unknown what a ‘safe reopening’ entails in LMICs given suboptimal diagnostic and
surveillance capabilities. Here we discuss three community-based public health measures
(sustained mitigation, zonal lockdown and dynamic rolling lockdowns) which seek to adequately
balance the public health and economic priorities. Each of these options have limitations and
prerequisites that may be context-specific and should be considered before implementation,
including implementation and maintenance costs, social and economic costs, context-specific
epidemic growth and the existing health resources.

INTRODUCTION
The coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has claimed more than 400,000

lives

worldwide[1] and has been responsible for significant economic disruptions globally[2]. Similar
to the high-income nations, low and middle-income countries (LMICs) also responded to COVID19 by implementing various population-level measures, including strict nationwide lockdowns and
physical distancing[3]. Worldwide, with no effective treatments for COVID-19 and a vaccine at
least a year away, these measures have been effective in preventing health systems from
becoming overloaded, especially in the LMICs where: 1) the risk of disease transmission is high
(populations are often large and dense, with a high degree of interaction and physical contact),
2) awareness of how to prevent disease is often poor (eg, clean water and hygiene practices), 3)
public health systems are often under-resourced (eg, safety equipment and intensive care
units/ICU), and 4) access to healthcare is limited and reliant on largely out-of-pocket payment.
These strict social distancing interventions come with a price: they are unsustainable in the long
term given their social, economic and psychological impacts. For example, a recently completed
survey in Bangladesh showed that after its initial days of lockdown, a staggering 72% of urban
and 54% of rural households had lost their main source of earnings[4]. Therefore, many LMICs
are currently lifting the lockdowns, irrespective of the status of infection and the level of
contagion. It remains, however, unclear what would be an optimal strategy for ‘safe re-opening’
(given the likelihood of disease resurgence), especially across low-income settings, where
diagnostic capacities and surveillance infrastructure is poor[5].
In this regard, we have considered three community-based public health strategies for LMICs,
which aim to strike a balance between health protection and preventing economic collapse, and
discuss possible application, ideal pre-requisites, and inherent limitations for each. They include:

1) sustained mitigation, 2) zonal lockdown, 3) rolling lockdown (dynamic measures). These
strategies (Figure 1) are not mutually exclusive and could be further adapted and combined
depending on local needs and disease progression.
SUSTAINED MITIGATION
Following the primary lockdown, staying on a ‘mitigation-only’ phase (a strategy adopted by
developed countries such as France, Switzerland and Italy) has involved measures such as
physical distancing, wearing masks, test-trace-isolation of positive cases, shielding of the
vulnerable and banning mass gatherings[6]. The successful implementation of this approach,
however, is contingent on a number of key factors.
First, the early implementation of a strict lockdown has resulted in a significant reduction of
contact rates and has reduced new infections[7],[8]. By contrast, many LMICs, where lockdown
has recently been lifted, appear to have an upward trend of cases and deaths[9]. Second,
availability of high levels of surveillance, mass testing and rapid case isolation are essential to
avoid the potential for resurgent epidemics, and facilitate containment[10],[11]. Third, for
contact-tracing, enough trained contact tracers (or scalable digital platforms) should be available,
with a relatively sparse target population (minimising the possibility of super-spreading events).
The effectiveness of contact-tracing might be importantly minimised in large, dense countries
such as Bangladesh (~1300 people/sqkm), compared to sparsely populated countries like Spain
(~90 people/sqkm)[12]. Contact-tracing is also less effective at the height of community spread
when the rates are on the rise. Fourth, individual and population-level adherence to mitigation
measures (eg, physical distancing, hygiene, home quarantine) must be adequate. For many
LMICs, this remains a challenge given large-scale social stigma and suboptimal risk
communication strategies[13]. Finally, healthcare services must be able to adequately cope with
the resurgence in new cases, including availability of specialised care, hospitals and ICU beds. In
many LMICs, there is however a chronic shortage of 1) critical care infrastructure (only 48000
ventilators are available in India to serve its 1.3 billion people[14]), 2) personal protective
equipment (PPE), 3) training of health workforce, and 4) good working conditions – all of which
reduce system efficiency and enhance likelihood of transmission among healthcare workers.
Despite being less restrictive than full lockdown, a mitigation-only strategy is not immune to
financial hardship as it can also lead to socioeconomic disruption – somewhat compromising its
sustainability over a prolonged period. For example, Sweden, which adopted some of the most
liberal mitigation measures such as keeping restaurants, bars, and gyms open throughout the
previous few months, whilst encouraging physical distancing rules, is expected to suffer ~10%
contraction in its economy in 2020 according to the Swedish Central Bank[15].

ZONAL LOCKDOWN
The idea of fencing between infected and healthy communities, termed cordon sanitaire, has been
deployed during a variety of outbreaks for centuries. In line with this principle, as an exit strategy,
many countries have transitioned to a system of “zonal lockdown”[16]. This system entails
identification of specific “hotspots” where a sudden outbreak cluster, with a high number of cases,
have been identified in real time. Such clustered social distancing works by dividing the population
into “zones” according to the geospatial distribution of disease cluster contained within, so that
interactions within a zone are significantly greater than interactions between zones[17].
Transmission hotspots, or “red zones” are subject to strict lockdown measures than “green
zones”, where very few or no new cases have been identified for several days. Such strategies
were adopted in France[17], with green zones defined by areas where the virus transmission is
relatively low and there is not as burdensome pressure placed on the healthcare system.
The “zonal lockdown” approach has several important requirements. First, this categorisation of
hotspots is typically a dynamic process, which requires an ability to reliably identify, in real time,
areas that meet or fall short of the pre-specified lockdown criteria. This requires continuous datadriven feedbacks on: 1) regional daily confirmed cases (either by date of reporting or onset of
symptoms), and 2) other time-series information needed to calculate the changes in regionspecific effective reproduction number (R, the average number of secondary infections per
infected individual), including daily numbers of hospitalized cases, daily numbers of deaths in
different age groups, and transmission dynamics (eg, average time from infection to death) [17].
While such strategy has been successfully established in developed settings (such as France,
where testing is widespread with 0.52 daily tests being done per 1000 population), this remains
challenging in many LMICs due to 1) absence of large-scale population surveillance system based
on randomly-selected individuals (e.g., in Bangladesh, the testing approach has focused on
purposive, self-referred samples, with significant selection bias), and 2) poor testing laboratory
facilities and reporting capacities (e.g., in Pakistan, only 0.09 daily tests are being conducted per
1000 individuals)[18]. In this regard, India has adapted a scalable mass "Pool testing"
approach[19]. This cost-effective strategy involves collecting multiple samples in a tube and
testing them with a single RT-PCR assay run. If the test is negative, all the people tested are
negative. If it is positive, every person has to be tested individually for the virus. This approach
reduces the time needed to test large swathes of the population[20].
Second, the classification of the zones should also be multifactorial. This should not only take into
consideration the incidence rate, but also the other epidemiological (e.g., doubling rate of new
cases; number of deaths) and administrative aspects (e.g., available hospital and ICU beds;
testing and surveillance structure; residential versus industrial zone). Third, managing the zones
efficiently to reduce transmission both within and outside of the zones is a major undertaking.

Recent reports from India shows that infection size in many containment areas is 100-fold to 200fold higher than the cases reported at those sites – indicating that containment efforts within
zones may not have fully paid off[21]. Therefore, detailed apriori standard operating procedures
should be devised to include aspects on 1) within-zone public health measures (eg, risk
communication, house-to-house surveillance, test booths, contact-tracing, case referral systems,
ambulance and medical facilities), 2) within-zone measures of emergency services (eg, food
supply, law enforcement, isolation centres, and burial facilities), and 3) outside-zone measures
such as creation of “buffer” zones (e.g., in India[19]) that surround the main containment zone
to minimise out-of-zone transmissions. Such detailed protocols are crucial for efficiency. In Iran,
for example, suboptimal zone management has increased risk of a second wave[22]. Finally,
similar to sustained mitigation strategy, the zonal lockdown will be most effective when the overall
rate of infection is in decline, accompanied by exhaustive vigilance.
While zonal lockdown, if implemented properly, can help contain the spread of the virus, efficacy
of this approach can be reduced by other concurrent transmission networks, such as those linked
to economic and social interdependency between zones[17]. Additionally, the impacts on the
economy, particularly inside the zones, can be considerably more severe than under mitigation
where the economy essentially opens with restrictions, exacerbating economic hardship in
countries with already weak economic performance and social security nets. Therefore, these
aspects merit careful consideration during the planning phase of this strategy.
ROLLING LOCKDOWN
Dynamic or “rolling” lockdown measures take place when strict social distancing measures are
applied and lifted periodically. This strategy has been described as a robust measure to minimise
uncertainty in both effective R values, and in the severity of the virus (i.e. the proportion of cases
requiring ICU admission)[23]. This approach may be potentially suitable for LMICs with large and
dense populations, high patterns of contact, poor economic/health systems resilience, and weak
testing/contact tracing capacities. Furthermore, this approach aims to provide a balance between
avoiding health systems being overloaded and grinding economies completely to a halt[24]. A
recent paper mathematically modelled the effects of either a strict 50-day suppression or a 50day mitigation, followed by 30 days of relaxation (during which businesses are allowed to reopen,
with basic hygiene measure kept in place), in 16 economically diverse countries. A strict 50-day
lockdown, that reduces the effective R value to 0.5, can prevent health systems overload and
leads to considerably fewer deaths (130,000 during 18 months in the 16 countries they modelled)
compared to a more relaxed 50-day mitigation/30-day relaxation cycle (~3.5 million predicted
deaths globally) and under no-intervention (counter-factual) scenario (8 million predicted
deaths)[25]. To further contextualize, a subsequent paper estimated that 1) a single, one-off

lockdown will be insufficient to bring the pandemic under control, and 2) secondary peaks could
be larger than the first, without continued restrictions[26].
However, as with the other strategies, this approach is also contingent on several factors. First,
before implementing a rolling lockdown, every developing country should carefully consider the
economic and social costs to implement these measures. Second, impacts on incidence and casefatality will rely on local levels of adequate adherence to social distancing measures. Third, this
approach would also bring a new set of logistical challenges. Therefore, countries will need to
formulate bespoke plans for reorganising business supply chains, so that they align with the
economy opening and closing. While such readjustments to complement a schedule of lockdown
is not ideal, unprecedented challenges often require unusual and adaptive solutions, especially if
other alternative exit strategies are not feasible. Furthermore, by establishing a detailed
surveillance system while the lockdown takes place, countries can modify the duration of the
lockdown and relaxation periods according to the behaviour of the epidemic in their settings. A
recent example of this has been in Pakistan, where the World Health Organization has
recommended a 14-day-on/14-day-off rolling lockdown to control the epidemic[27].
In conclusion, several strategies exist to enable the LMICs to safely return to ‘normality’, allowing
for preservation of health with controlled economic implications. Beyond the impact that the virus
has on health and mortality, the measures taken to counteract its effect have relevant
implications for the financial infrastructure of a nation and the mental health of its citizens. It is
essential to consider these potential options to identify balanced alternatives to tackle the
pandemic. However, each option discussed here has important prerequisites and limitations, and
their impacts may vary across settings. Therefore, a suitable, “context-specific” strategy should
be based on several inter-related considerations: 1) local epidemic growth rate, 2) existing health
infrastructure (to survey, test, and treat, at scale), 3) social and economic costs, and 4) carefullydevised plans to implement and sustain the measures.

Figure 1: Summary of various post-lockdown community-based public health strategies for
LMICs

REFERENCES
1.

Worldometer. COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC. COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS
PANDEMIC (2020). Available at: https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/. (Accessed:
8th June 2020)

2.

Sterne, G. & Sleptsova, E. Research Briefing | Global Coronavirus Watch: EMs weigh
health vs economy. (2020).

3.

Gopinath, G. The Great Lockdown: Worst Economic Downturn Since the Great
Depression. IMFBlog Insights and Analysis on Economics and Finance (2020).

4.

Banks, N. & Hulme, D. Understanding the Impacts of Covid-19 on Livelihoods in
Bangladesh: Findings from the PPRC-BIGD Rapid Response Survey. Glob. Dev. Inst. Blog
(2020).

5.

Nsubuga, P. et al. Chapter 53. Public Health Surveillance: A Tool for Targeting and
Monitoring Interventions. in Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries (2nd
Edition) (2006). doi:10.1596/978-0-8213-6179-5/chpt-53

6.

Walensky, R. P. & del Rio, C. From Mitigation to Containment of the COVID-19 Pandemic.
JAMA (2020). doi:10.1001/jama.2020.6572

7.

Wilder-Smith, A. & Freedman, D. O. Isolation, quarantine, social distancing and
community containment: Pivotal role for old-style public health measures in the novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outbreak. J. Travel Med. 27, (2020).

8.

Lau, H. et al. The positive impact of lockdown in Wuhan on containing the COVID-19
outbreak in China. J. Travel Med. 27, (2020).

9.

Economist, T. Infections are rising fast in Bangladesh, India and Pakistan. The Economist
(2020). Available at: https://www.economist.com/asia/2020/06/06/infections-are-risingfast-in-bangladesh-india-and-pakistan. (Accessed: 9th June 2020)

10.

Commission, E. Coronavirus: a common approach for safe and efficient mobile tracing
apps across the EU. (2020).

11.

Steinbrook, R. Contact Tracing, Testing, and Control of COVID-19-Learning from Taiwan.
JAMA Internal Medicine (2020). doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.2072

12.

United Nations. World Population Prospects 2019. Department of Economic and Social
Affairs. World Population Prospects 2019. (2019).

13.

Newagebd. Stigma around COVID-19 hampers the fight against it. www.newagebd.net
(2020). Available at: https://www.newagebd.net/article/105701/stigma-around-covid19-hampers-the-fight-against-it. (Accessed: 9th June 2020)

14.

Kapoor, G., Sriram, A., Joshi, J., Nandi, A. & Laxminarayan, R. COVID-19 in India : Statewise estimates of current hospital beds, intensive care unit (ICU) beds and ventilators.
(2020).

15.

Riksbank, S. Monetary policy April 2020: The Riksbank is supporting an economy in crisis.

(2020).
16.

Oliu-Barton, M., Pradelski, B. & Attia, L. Exit strategy : from self-confinement to green
zones. EsadeEcPol Insight #6 (2020).

17.

Oliu-Barton, M. & Pradelski, B. S. . Green zones: a mathematical proposal for how to exit
from the COVID-19 lockdown. World Economic Forum (2020).

18.

Hasell, J. et al. Statistics and Research Coronavirus (COVID-19) Testing. Our World in
Data (2020). Available at: https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus-testing#.

19.

MOHFW. Guideline for RT-PCR based pooled sampling for migrants/returnees from
abroad/green zones. (2020).

20.

MOHFW. Containment Plan Novel Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID 19) Version 2
(updated 16.05.2020). (2020).

21.

Dutta, S. S. 15-30% people in containment areas exposed to COVID-19: ICMR’s
serosurvey. The New Indian Express (2020). Available at:
https://www.newindianexpress.com/nation/2020/jun/08/15-30-people-in-containmentareas-exposed-to-covid-19-icmrs-serosurvey-2153893.html.

22.

BBC. Coronavirus: Iran fears second wave after surge in cases. BBC News (2020).
Available at: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-52903443. (Accessed: 8th
June 2020)

23.

Ferguson, N. M. et al. Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce
COVID-19 mortality and healthcare demand. Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team
(2020). doi:10.25561/77482

24.

Chowdhury, R. Rolling lockdowns could protect both economies and health in low-income
countries. The Conversation (2020). Available at: https://theconversation.com/rollinglockdowns-could-protect-both-economies-and-health-in-low-income-countries-139054.
(Accessed: 9th June 2020)

25.

Chowdhury, R. et al. Dynamic interventions to control COVID-19 pandemic: a
multivariate prediction modelling study comparing 16 worldwide countries. Eur. J.
Epidemiol. 35, 389–399 (2020).

26.

Kissler, S. M., Tedijanto, C., Goldstein, E., Grad, Y. H. & Lipsitch, M. Projecting the
transmission dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 through the postpandemic period. Science (80-. ).
368, 860–868 (2020).

27.

Gabol, I. WHO says Pakistan meets no pre-requisites for easing restrictions, recommends
‘intermittent lockdown’. Dawn (2020). Available at:
https://www.dawn.com/news/1562406.

