Suppression and Timing:
Using COVID-19 Policies against
Political Dissidents?1

Joan Barceló1 , Tiril Høye Rahn2 , Cindy Cheng3 ,
Robert Kubinec4 , Luca Messerschmidt5
In this paper, we explore whether government incentives to repress domestic
dissidents influences the adoption, timing, and duration of government responses
to the COVID-19 pandemic. We argue that governments which have historically
repressed internal dissent are more likely to adopt policies in response to the
pandemic which are observationally equivalent to those that they would use to
limit domestic dissent — in particular policies that restrict citizen’s freedom of
movement — compared to countries that have not. Empirically, we find that
governments that have recently engaged in state violence against civilians have
been more likely to enact lockdown and curfew policies, have done so earlier in
the pandemic, and have implemented these policies over a longer time period.
Overall, our results have implications for understanding how the repressiveness
of state institutions shapes policy responses to a global health crisis.
11 Assistant Professor, New York University - Abu Dhabi; joan.barcelo@nyu.edu. 2 Student, New York University - Abu Dhabi; tiril.rahn@nyu.edu. 3 Post-doctoral researcher,
Hochschule für Politik at the Technical University of Munich (TUM) and the TUM School
of Governance; cindy.cheng@hfp.tum.de. 4 Assistant Professor, New York University - Abu
Dhabi; rmk7@nyu.edu. 5 Doctoral student, Hochschule für Politik at the Technical University
of Munich (TUM) and the TUM School of Governance; luca.messerschmidt@hfp.tum.de.
For constructive criticisms on a previous draft, we are grateful to the guest-editors of the
special issue, Gina Yannitell Reinhardt and Carmen Lutmar, and the feedback provided by
Babak RezaeeDaryakenari, as well as the rest of the participants of the online workshop of
this special issue.
We deeply thank the CoronaNet co-PIs, Allison Hartnett Spencer, Caress Schenk, Timothy
Model, and Vanja Grujic, and the very large number of research assistants (RAs) who contributed to building the CoronaNet dataset. We very much thank Anelia Petrova, Natalia
Filkina-Spreizer, Saif Khan, Annika Kaiser, Danny Downes, Sonja Muller, Stella Kim, Sarah
Edmonds, Klea Vogli, Linlin Chen, Mayisa Nasirova, Janice Klaiber, Joshua Diversi, Katrin
Hermann, Emily Westropp, Anoushka Thakre, Lionel Illert, Anke Horn, Isabel Conti, Isak
Jones, Cootje Linssen, Konstanze Schönfeld, Bruno Ciccarini, Clara Wang, Henning Richter,
and Jack Kubinec for their contributions, including cleaning, validation, project management,
and visualization.
We also gratefully acknowledge funding support from the TUM Chair of International Relations, the Hochschule fur Politik at the Technical University of Munich (TUM), New York
University Abu Dhabi (Covid-19 Facilitator Research Grant) and the Leibniz Research Alliance Group ’Crises in a Globalised World’. This project has also received funding from the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No
101016233. Technical infrastructure support has been generously provided by Overton, Slack
Technologies and RStudio. The funders had no role in study design, data collection, analysis,
or interpretation, nor in the decision to publish or in the preparation of the manuscript.

Introduction
Emergency powers should not be a weapon governments can
wield to quash dissent, control the population, and even
perpetuate their time in power
—Michelle Bachelet, UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights, April 27, 2020.

Governments around the world have adopted a variety of policies to limit the spread of the
COVID-19 virus, many of which restrict citizens’ rights and civil liberties (e.g. curfews,
lockdowns). Though many countries have adopted restrictive policies to prevent the spread
of the virus, they have made very different decisions in terms of how fast, how long and how
strongly they implement them.1 What explains great variation in the adoption, timing and
duration of policies made in response to the COVID-19 pandemic?
In this paper, we investigate whether pre-existing incentives for state repression
influence the decision to adopt restrictive policies writ large, as well as the timing and
subsequent duration of such policies for governments that adopt them. When facing domestic
challengers, governments can either give in or repress dissidents. If governments choose to
repress, they often choose collective repression methods if they have limited resources to
implement targeted repression or want to signal state strength (Rozenas, 2020). However,
even when states have incentives to collectively repress domestic challengers, international
pressure acts as an important check to such behaviour. By calling attention to abusive
state behaviors, external actors can increase the costs of repression and consequently, reduce
the likelihood and severity of state-sponsored violence against civilians. Critically, however,
external actors are only able to exert such pressure if they can observe the repressive actions
1

By the end of April 2020 in the Philippines, over 120,000 people had been cited for quarantine violations
and over 30,000 had been arrested over COVID-19 related breaches (The Diplomat, April 2020). Further, the
Philippine police said it would stop issuing citations to alleged violators, instead arresting them immediately.
In Peru, President Martı́n Vizcarra announced one of the earliest coronavirus lockdowns in Latin America on
16 March. Peru mobilized the army and the police to enforce the quarantine (The Guardian, May 2020). In
contrast, far from enforcing a lockdown, the Swedish government allowed the vast majority of the population
to engage in voluntary social distancing (BBC, April 2020). Along a related vein, the president of Belarus,
Alexandr Lukashenko, called fears over the COVID-19 a “psychosis” and suggested that a regimen of drinking
vodka and visiting saunas would be effective towards combating the disease (Makhovsky, 2020).

2

of other states.
We argue that the global COVID-19 pandemic has created a scenario that impairs
the capacity of the international community to exert pressure on states to limit violent
actions against civilians. Policies implemented to fight against the spread of the disease
are observationally equivalent to policies commonly used to fight domestic dissent, including
curfew and lockdown policies. This observational equivalence limits the capacity of the
international community to exert pressure over repressive regimes. Hence, governments that
have underlying incentives to oppress their citizens can take advantage of the global health
crisis to strengthen repressive measures to control domestic dissidents without bearing the
costs of greater international pressure.
Following this logic, we hypothesize three connected processes:
1. In the wake of the global pandemic, governments with a history of repressing citizens
have greater incentives to embrace restrictive policies earlier because such policies not
only allow them to achieve public health objectives, but also allow them to respond to
domestic dissent, compared to governments that do not.
2. By the same token, governments with a history of repressing citizens are more likely
to order restrictive preventive measures at any time in the pandemic compared to
governments that do not.
3. Finally, governments with a history of repressing citizens are also more likely to impose
these policies for longer periods compared to governments that do not.
To evaluate our hypotheses, we make use of the CoronaNet Government Response
Dataset (CoronaNet) with data collected until June 30, 2020 (Cheng, Barceló, Hartnett, Kubinec and Messerschmidt, 2020). The CoronaNet Project is a large hand-coded dataset of
more than 40,000 separate policy announcements made in reaction to COVID-19, including
lockdowns and curfews, across more than 195 countries. We complement this dataset with

3

geo-located information on violence against civilians reported in the Armed Conflict Location and Event Dataset (ACLED) before and throughout the COVID-19 outbreak. These
two data sources are further supplemented with historical data of the registered number of
reported COVID-19 cases and deaths from the European Center for Disease Prevention and
Control (ECDC).
Consistent with our theory, we find that governments that have used violence against
civilians in the months preceding the COVID-19 outbreak have been quicker to restrict citizens’ freedom of movement through stay-at-home orders compared to governments with
no recent history of violence against civilians. Beyond timing, we also find that previously
abusive governments have been more likely to adopt these policies during the period under
study. Further, we find that governments that have a recent record of violence against civilians have also kept restrictive measures for longer periods of time compared to governments
with no recent record of violence. These effects exist even when adjusting for the severity of
the epidemic in a given country, as well as relevant potential confounders such as population
density, regime type, and economic development.

Repression and Dissent Amidst a Global Pandemic
Dissent takes place when non-state actors collectively genuinely do, or threaten to, impose
costs on its government to encourage a change in the status quo (Ritter, Conrad et al., 2016).
Violent and non-violent acts, such as strikes, boycotts, riots, and non-violent protests, taken
by dissenters can endanger the government’s hold on power. The government can respond
to these challenges to its power in two ways: either give in to the dissident’s demands by
changing the status quo, or repress the dissidents themselves. (Pierskalla, 2010; Ritter, 2014;
Ritter, Conrad et al., 2016).
State repression “involves the actual or threatened use of physical sanctions against
an individual or organization, within the territorial jurisdiction of the state, for the purpose of

4

imposing a cost on the target as well as deterring specific activities and/or beliefs perceived to
be challenging to government personnel, practices or institutions” (Davenport 2007, drawing
on Goldstein 1978, xxvii). Repression can be targeted toward individuals or particular
groups (e.g., arrests) or indiscriminately applied toward entire collectives (e.g., curfews or
lockdowns). Curfews, which are imposed on everyone within a geographical area and thus
apply equally to political dissenters as well as apolitical civilians, are one common form for
indiscriminate repression (Brass, 2006; Aksoy, Menger and Tavits, 2020). Though most have
non-violent enforcement mechanisms, in some cases, violations can be punished by fines,
imprisonment and, in extreme cases, even death (Brass, 2006).
Why do governments choose to repress dissenters as opposed to give in to their
demands? Scholarly consensus suggests authorities repress its citizens to control dissent
(e.g., Moore, 2000; Davenport, 2007; Regan and Henderson, 2002; Earl, Soule and McCarthy,
2003; Nordås and Davenport, 2013; Ritter, Conrad et al., 2016). States are more likely to use
collective repression, as opposed to relent to dissenters’ demands, when the state’s capacity
to survive a wide-spread rebellion is weak, when cross-group polarization is strong, and when
there are more grievances across the entire society (Rozenas, 2020). Repression and dissent
are, however, endogenous (Ritter, Conrad et al., 2016). Governments often respond to threats
to its authority with repressive behavior. At the same time, state repression strongly raises
the likelihood of dissent. That is, though governments engage in repressive behavior in the
hopes that forceful action will deter further dissent, repression often provides incentives for
the very behavior governments intend to deter (Davenport, 2007; Hill Jr and Jones, 2014).2
Similarly with regards to collective repression in particular, though the existing literature
points ample evidence of its widespread use, the same literature also suggests that violent
collective repression is at best ineffective and at worst counter-productive when responding
to dissident challenges (Kalyvas, 2006; Valentino, 2014).
The literature identifies two major arguments as to why states still use collective
2

However, see Lyall (2009) and Barceló (2018) for null or inconsistent findings for the backfire theory of
state repression.

5

repression despite the potential backfire effects: state capacity and signalling. States often
do not have the resources to apply targeted repression and therefore must use lower cost
collective repressive measures. To repress individual citizens, the state must obtain intelligence about their behavior, which is highly costly to obtain. As such, only states that
have the resources to control, monitor, and collect taxes from the population will have the
capacity to selectively crack down on domestic dissidents. Even states with high capacity
may choose to engage in relatively low-cost collective repression. Indeed, Hitler was quoted
as saying, ”I shall spread terror through the surprising application of all means. Why should
I deal otherwise with all my political opponents? These so-called atrocities save me hundreds of thousands of individual actions against protesters and discontents” (Hitler, quoted
in Gurr (1986, 46-47)). In general then, while states with low capacity cannot apply selective
repression and must therefore rely on less efficient forms of collective repression (Kalyvas,
2006; Blankenship, 2018; Bueno de Mesquita and Dickson, 2007; Gregory, Schröder and
Sonin, 2011), states more generally may choose collective repression over targeted repression
because of its lower costs.
Furthermore, states may also intentionally use collective repression as a signalling
device. In an environment of incomplete information with repeated interaction, strategic
actors have incentives to engage in a reputation-building strategy (Kreps, Milgrom, Roberts
and Wilson, 1982; Kreps and Wilson, 1982). For instance, executors of state violence in El
Salvador were instructed to indiscriminately repress the indigenous population even in the
absence of evidence of disloyalty (Gould and Laura-Santiago (2008)). In this case, the state
had the capacity to selectively repress but chose not to. This argument emphasises that
repression of citizens allows leaders to signal resolve and toughness to avoid offering policy
concessions (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2000; Walter, 2006).
While its theoretical logic is sound, the signaling argument is wanting on the grounds
of empirical consistency. In many instances, states not only abstain from publicizing the repressive measures, but also attempt to cover and hide it (Gruffydd-Jones, 2019; Shadmehr

6

and Bernhardt, 2015), particularly when applying large-scale indiscriminate repression. Abusive states may believe that the expected political benefit of repressing domestic challengers
is positive only if it remains hidden from the international community (Afesorgbor, 2019).
Indeed, repressive measures can be costly if they become publicly reported as they could damage a country’s international reputation or legitimacy and lead to significant consequences in
the form of breaking clauses in preferential trade agreements (Hafner-Burton and Tsutsui,
2005), economic sanctions (Afesorgbor, 2019), or even military interventions (Conley and
Hazlett, 2019).
International pressure can directly reduce the likelihood and severity of state repression. By calling attention to repressive state behaviors, external actors such as international
organizations (DeMeritt, 2012), other states (Terman and Voeten, 2018), human rights tribunals (Appel, 2018; Hillebrecht, 2014), international media (Krain, 2012), and human rights
NGOs (Krain, 2012; Murdie and Davis, 2012; Terman and Voeten, 2018) can pressure repressive governments to induce compliance with global norms and end their abusive behavior.
Beyond the direct influence on state repression, public criticism may trigger further external action that makes it costly for states to continue with repression. This may
work through several pathways. First, repressive states may be excluded from international
treaties if systematic human rights abuses come to light. For instance, Hafner-Burton (2005;
2011) finds that human rights clauses in preferential trade agreements tying human rights
practices to trade policy makes repression costlier for the state and therefore less likely. Similarly, Donno and Neureiter (2018) demonstrate that adding human rights clauses to economic
agreements effectively reduces state repression, especially among countries that depend on
foreign aid. Second, foreign aid may be withdrawn as a result of state abuses. Lebovic and
Voeten (2009) show that multilateral institutions (e.g., the World Bank) punish countries
that violate human rights by reducing their allocated amount of foreign aid. Third, regardless of their actual effectiveness on preserving human rights (Escribà-Folch and Wright, 2010;
Peksen and Drury, 2009; Wood, 2008), the disruption of state repression constitutes one of

7

the major explanations for imposing economic sanctions (Hufbauer, Schott, Elliott et al.,
1990). At an extreme scenario, public knowledge of ongoing large-scale state violence may
lead to military intervention to end mass atrocities (Conley and Hazlett, 2019).
Overall, international pressure may deter state repression against civilians or its
severity through several mechanisms, including international treaties, aid, sanctions, and
even foreign interventions to stop large-scale violence. While collective repression is itself
relatively low cost compared to targeted repression and may additionally provide signalling
benefits to its users, international pressure may raise the cost enough to overcome these
perks. However, international pressure crucially depends on the ability of external actors to
observe repressive state actions.
In the past, sovereign states have commonly made use of stay-at-home orders, in the
form of lockdowns or curfews, as an important collective repressive tool to quell politicallymotivated violence from domestic challengers (Brass, 2006). The government of Sri Lanka, for
instance, has implemented several nation-wide curfews to reduce ethnic violence since 1983
(Pavey, 2008); the Indian national government has made use of curfews and lockdowns to
tackle potential unrest in Kashmir (Graff, Galonnier et al., 2012), the Egyptian government
imposed a curfew during the 2011 uprising (Marfleet, 2016), and the Turkish government
recently adopted curfew policies to fight Kurdish militant activities in the 2015-2019 period
(Aksoy, Menger and Tavits, 2020), just to mention a few examples. Across most cases,
stay-at-home orders have had significant implications for the safety and well-being of those
who live within the bounded areas, including food shortages, limited access to health and
education, and even severe violations of the right to physical integrity and life (Brass, 2006).
In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic however, distinguishing between measures
taken to limit the spread of the virus and those to address dissent against the government has
become more difficult. in response to the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, the majority of
national governments have implemented large-scale non-pharmaceutical interventions such
as lockdowns and curfews . Figure 1 documents the sudden spike in the stay-at-home orders

8

Figure 1: Timeline of stay-at-home orders around the world

Note: Black shade intensity represents the number of policies with a stay-at-home order in
place at a given day. The red line smooths the trend
around the world between mid-March and mid-April, reaching a peak in the second week of
April, and a gradual easiening of restrictions from then on.3
While these interventions have had a substantial effect in reducing transmission of
the virus (Flaxman, Mishra, Gandy, Unwin, Mellan, Coupland, Whittaker, Zhu, Berah,
Eaton et al., 2020), the type of policies that have been put in place to fight against the virus
are observationally equivalent to policies commonly used to fight domestic dissent, including
stay-at-home orders, internal border restrictions, and restrictions of mass gatherings. As
a result, external actors cannot conclusively separate when such policies are predominately
aimed at limiting the spread of the virus as opposed to aimed at repressing domestic dissent.
This impairs their ability to constraining the use of such policies.
In this context, governments with underlying incentives to oppress their citizens
3
The first stay-at-home order in the dataset goes back to the province of Jiangxi, China, on February
6. Before that date, stay-at-home orders had affected a few cities, counties, and districts in the provinces
of Anhui, Hubei (including the city of Wuhan, the earliest epicenter of the pandemics), Liaoning, Jianxi,
Shaanxi, Shandong, Sichuan, Zhejiang. However, the stay-at-home order in the province of Jiangxi was the
first time a stay-at-home order affected an entire province, a first-level administrative unit in China.

9

may find in the global pandemic an opportunity to strengthen their repressive measures to
further control domestic dissent without bearing the costs of greater international pressure.
While we cannot directly observe the sincere intentions of specific governments, we test and
evaluate three observable implications consistent with our logical argument.
First, we expect that those governments with a recent history of violence against
civilians may readily embrace the imposition of restrictive policies quickly as the number
of COVID-19 confirmed cases surges. Following this intuition, we hypothesize the following
empirical observation:

Hypothesis 1: Governments that have a recent history of violence against civilians may
impose restrictive measures earlier in the pandemic than governments with no recent history
of state violence against civilians.

Due to this double incentive, we also hypothesize that governments with a recent
history of violence against civilians to be, on average, more likely to adopt restrictive policies
at any point in time compared to governments that have no record of state violence. More
specifically, our second expectation is the following:

Hypothesis 2: Governments that have a recent history of violence against civilians may be
more likely to adopt restrictive measures than governments with no recent history of state
violence against civilians.

Similarly, governments that have a recent history of violence against civilians not
only should they have incentives to impose restrictions, and earlier on, but we also hypothesize that this double incentive should make them more reluctant to lift restrictions once the
pandemic wanes. This logic leads to our third empirical hypothesis:

10

Hypothesis 3: Governments that have a recent history of violence against civilians may
be more likely to impose restrictive measures for longer periods than governments with no
recent history of state violence against civilians.

Data
Our main data source is the CoronaNet Government Response Dataset (CoronaNet) until
June 30 (Cheng et al., 2020). The CoronaNet Project is an ongoing data collection project,
which covers systematic information on the multitude of policy responses governments have
taken to address the spread of the COVID-19 virus. As of October 20, the CoronaNet includes
more than 40,000 separate policy announcements made in reaction to the COVID-19. For
each policy announcement, the CoronaNet collects the exact timing of the announcement,
the timing of its implementation, the governmental authority that initiates the policy, the
type of policy being implemented, its duration, the geographic target of the policy, the
compliance mechanism, and the way in which a policy is enforced, among other attributes.4
We measure the timing of implementation of stay-at-home orders, either in the form
of a “Curfew” or a “Lockdown”, for at least one first-level administrative unit in the country
(i.e., state, region). To define terms, a curfew is implemented if there are “government policies
that limit domestic freedom of movement to certain times of the day” and a lockdown is
implemented if there are “government policies that force citizens to stay at home all the day
except for essential activities”.5 See Cheng et al. (2020) for further details on the definitions
of policy types.
We complement the CoronaNet data with geo-located information on violence against
civilians provided in near-real time from the Armed Conflict Location and Event Dataset
4

We choose to use the CoronaNet dataset over other existing datasets because it has greater coverage (over
190 countries), a rigorous and systematic data validation procedure, provides portable document formats with
the information source, and fine-grained information about the initiator, target, and enforcement mechanism
of the policy.
5
Note then, that curfews and lockdowns are different methods of restricting civilian movement and as
such are mutually exclusive policies, i.e. countries that impose curfews do not also impose lockdowns in the
same boand vice-versa.

11

(ACLED) before the COVID-19 outbreak (Raleigh, Linke, Hegre and Karlsen, 2010). ACLED
collects fine-grained data on the locations, dates, actors, and number of fatalities, of all reported political violence around the world. For the purposes of our empirical analyses, we
use the ACLED data on“violence against civilians”, which is defined as “violent events where
an organised armed group deliberately inflicts violence upon unarmed non-combatants”
(ACLED). By definition, the perpetrators of such acts can only be state forces and their
affiliations such as rebels, militias, and external forces. We exclude from our measure of
state repression any event involving violence against civilians where the perpetrator of violence are rebel groups against unarmed civilians, or civilians against civilians (e.g., protests
and riots).6 Importantly for our coding strategy, we do not impose a minimum number of
civilian fatalities needed to qualify as an event, and we also include any attempts at inflicting harm (e.g., beating, rape, mutilation) against civilians or forcibly disappearing (e.g.,
kidnapping) civilian actors.7
The two main explanatory variables in the models are: (1) the number of fatalities
per one million population as a result of violence against civilians in the country, and (2)
the number of events involving violence against civilians per one million population in the
country. The time window to count the number of fatalities and events is the entire 2019.
However, none of our findings are sensitive to this time window (see the section “Robustness
Checks,” as well as the online Appendix D for further information.
While ACLED provides fine-grained data on political violence in Africa, Asia, Latin
America and the Caribbean, as well as Eastern Europe, some countries from Western Europe,
North America and Oceania are not available in the dataset. In total, our analysis includes
134 countries (see the online Appendix A for a list of countries, the online Appendix B
for descriptive statistics). We, however, evaluate the potential impact of this non-random
6
See the “Robustness Checks” section, as well as Appendices E and F, for the sensitivity of our findings to including all episodes of violence against civilians regardless of the perpetrating actor or including
only episodes that are known to be directly committed by state forces. The results remains substantively
unaltered.
7
The three subcategories of violence against civilians that are added to create our measure of violence
are: “Sexual violence”, “Attacks”, and “Abduction/Forced Dissapreance”.

12

missingness in our section “Robustness Checks,” as well as in the online Appendix G.
For each of our models, we further include two sets of controls. First, we include
measures of concepts that the literature identifies as important causes of state repression
and which could correlate with policy responses to the COVID-19, namely: democratic
political institutions, economic development, state capacity, and population density (Hill Jr
and Jones, 2014). We rely on the V-Dem polyarchy index to measure democratic political
institutions (Teorell, Coppedge, Lindberg and Skaaning, 2019),8 GDP per capita, which is
based on purchasing power parity (PPP) in 2019, expressed in 2011 international dollars, and
annual GDP growth in 2019 — or the most recent year — to measure economic development
(Bank, 2020).9 State capacity is measured using the Government Effectiveness measure
from the World Bank (Bank, 2020). In a second set of control variables, we include healthrelated factors, with extensive country coverage to minimize a reduction in sample size, that
could be associated with state repression, a country’s risk of exposure to the pandemics, and
policy responses to the COVID-19: the share of the population aged 70 or above, diabetes
prevalence and cardiovascular death rate. Further, all models include region fixed effects to
account for region-specific heterogeneity.

Research Design
In what follows, we give an overview of our research design for testing each of our three
hypotheses.
For our first hypothesis (H1), we evaluate whether countries that have exerted greater
violence against civilians before the COVID-19 pandemic implemented restrictive measures
earlier than countries with no history of violence against civilians. The outcome variable
is the timing of implementation of stay-at-home orders (operationalized either as curfew or
a lockdown), for the entire country, or for the majority of subnational units in a country.
8

Missing values in V-Dem polyarchy index have been filled with the predicted values from the Freedom
House ratings using an ordinary least squares equation.
9
Missing values in GDP per capita have been filled with information from the CIA factbook.

13

Specifically, the outcome variable is operationalized as the number of days between the first
confirmed case of COVID-19 in a country and the adoption of a stay-at-home order, either
a lockdown or a curfew. We run a set of proportional hazard models to evaluate whether
those countries with greater state repression against civilians before the outbreak implement
restrictive measures more quickly than countries with no such record.
We also build a cross-sectional dataset to assess whether countries with a recent
history of repression against civilians are more likely to implement restrictive measures such
as stay-at-home orders, and whether these governments are more likely to keep restrictive
policies for longer periods. Using this dataset, we test our second hypothesis (H2) by using
a binary variable that takes the value of 1 if the country implemented a stay-at-home order,
either in the form of a lockdown or a curfew, between January 1, 2020, and June 30, 2020
as the outcome measure.
Finally, using the same cross-sectional dataset as for H2, to test our third hypothesis
(H3), we use the number of days, either consecutive or not, that the country has had a stayat-home order in place between January 1, 2020, and June 30, 2020 as our outcome measure.
For both of these models (H2 and H3), we include two indicators of violence against civilians
in the country: the number of fatalities from events involving violence against civilians per
one million population, as well as the number of such events per one million population in
2019. We regress the adoption of a stay-at-home order in the country (H2) or the number
of days with a stay-at-home policy in place (H3) on the level of repression against civilians
immediately before the beginning of the pandemics to evaluate our hypotheses.

Results
In this section, we provide our evaluation for our three hypotheses in three separate subsections.

14

Are Repressive States Quicker in Imposing Stay-at-home Orders?
To evaluate our first hypothesis, we begin by considering some graphical descriptive evidence.
Figure 2 plots the survival probability from the day of the first COVID-19 case (rightcensored at June 30, 2020) to the adoption of a stay-at-home policy initiated by the central
government to, at least, one of the country’s regions.10 The color of the lines and the 95%
confidence intervals indicate whether the country had a below-median (blue) or above-median
(yellow) level of state repression, with state repression measured alternatively as the number
of fatalities from violence against civilians (Figure 1a) or the number of events of violence
against civilians (Figure 1b) in 2019.
The difference in slopes between countries that have been below versus above the
medium in terms of repressing their citizens suggests that there is a relationship between
having a recent history of violence against civilians and imposing restrictive measures to
respond to the COVID-19 pandemics. Countries which rated as above the median in terms
of their repressive actions implemented a stay-at-home order on average 18 days (when
repression is defined as the number of prior violent events) or 19 days (when repression is
defined as the number of fatalities) after the first confirmed case. In contrast, countries that
had a below-the-median level of violence against civilians, take on average 29 days (when
violence is defined as the prior number of violent events) or 28 days (when operationalizing
repression as fatalities) to implement a stay-at-home order.11 The main takeaway from this
descriptive evidence is that countries that have used violence against civilians in the months
preceding the occurrence of its first COVID-19 case seem to have implemented restrictive
measures more quickly than those countries that have had no recent history of using violence
against civilians in response to the spread of the COVID-19. However, this evidence is only
suggestive given that it relies on a crude measure of violence — a simple dummy based on
above and below the median of events or fatalities — and does not control for potential
10

Or the equivalent to the first subnational division in the country.
The differences in slopes are statistically significant when using both the number of events (log-rank
test, p < 0.001) and the number of fatalities (log-rank test, p = 0.01).
11

15

confounders.
For a more robust analysis, Table 1 reports Cox proportional hazards models that
estimate the number of days from the first COVID-19 confirmed case in the country to the
adoption of a stay-at-home order as a function of the number of events involving violence
against civilians and the number of fatalities in these events. We note that in Cox proportional hazards regression models, coefficients indicate the hazard rate, i.e. is the risk of
“failure” (in this case, the probability of adopting a stay-at-home order), given that the event
has not yet occurred (in this case, given that the country has not already implemented a
stay-at-home order). Therefore, predictors with positive coefficients are factors that increase
the likelihood that a policy is implemented more quickly.
The first Cox model shows that countries that experienced a greater number of
fatalities from violence against civilians in the months immediately preceding the pandemics
outbreak are more likely to implement stay-at-home orders earlier than those with no recent
record of violence against civilians. In terms of the effect size, the hazard ratio indicates that
an increase in violence, measured by the log number of fatalities per one million population,
is associated with an increase in the relative risk of adopting a stay-at-home policy of 23.4%
(e0.21 ). Consequently, a 10% increase in the number of fatalities per one million population
is associated with a 2% increase in the hazard of adopting a stay-at-home order (e0.21·log(1.1) ).
Adding the set of potential confounders in Cox models 2-4, the effect of the violence against
civilians before the outbreak remains statistically significant at the at the 99% confidence
level. In the reported model with all controls, the hazard ratio indicates that an increase
in violence, again measured by the log number of fatalities per one million population, is
associated with an even larger increase in the relative risk of adopting a stay-at-home policy
of 25.9% (e0.23 ) compared to the model without controls. In other words, a 10% increase in
the number of fatalities per one million population is associated with a 2.2% increase in the
hazard of adopting a stay-at-home order (e0.23·log(1.1) ).
The Cox models 5-8 re-estimate the main models using the number of violent events

16

Figure 2: Survival probability plots of COVID-19 policy response by preceding violence
against civilians
(a) Number of events of violence against civilians

(b) Number of fatalities in events of violence against civilians

17

Table 1: Cox proportional hazards models of estimating the effect of state repression in 2019
on the time to adopting a stay-at-home order

Days from 1st COVID-19 confirmed case to stay-at-home order
(1)

(2)

(3)

N of violent fatalities (log) 0.21∗∗∗ 0.18∗∗ 0.23∗∗∗
(per one million population) (0.07) (0.08) (0.08)

(4)

0.10
(0.55)

0.39
(0.58)

State Capacity

−0.17 −0.54∗∗
(0.19) (0.24)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.23∗∗∗
(0.09)
0.22∗∗∗ 0.18∗ 0.27∗∗∗
(0.09) (0.09) (0.10)

0.31∗∗∗
(0.11)

0.38
(0.64)

0.07
(0.55)

0.38
(0.65)

−0.42
(0.26)

−0.18 −0.56∗∗
(0.19) (0.24)

−0.42
(0.26)

N of violent events (log)
(per one million population)
Democracy score (V-Dem)

(5)

0.35
(0.59)

GDP per capita (log)

0.43∗∗
(0.17)

0.44∗∗
(0.19)

0.46∗∗∗
(0.17)

0.52∗∗∗
(0.20)

GDP Annual Growth

0.06
(0.04)

0.04
(0.05)

0.07
(0.05)

0.05
(0.05)

Population Density (’000)

−0.07
(0.46)

0.08
(0.46)

−0.10
(0.48)

0.07
(0.49)

Population aged 70
or older (percentage)

−0.03
(0.06)

−0.04
(0.06)

Diabetes prevalence

−0.02
(0.04)

−0.03
(0.04)

Cardiovascular death rate

0.001
(0.001)

0.0005
(0.001)

Region FE
Observations

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

∗

Yes
129

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Standard errors in parenthesis. Region-Fixed Effects include:
Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, and South America.

18

Yes
129

against civilians instead of the number of fatalities from violent events as our measure of
repression. The positive coefficient reported in model 5 supports the findings in our previous
models: countries that experienced a greater number of events involving violence against
civilians in the months immediately preceding the global pandemic are more likely to implement stay-at-home orders earlier than countries that did not. This effect is statistically
significant at the 99% confidence level. Concretely, the coefficient indicates that an increase
in the log number of events of violence against civilians per one million inhabitants is on
average associated with an increase the relative risk of adopting a stay-at-home policy of
23.4% (e0.21 ). Substantively, this means that a 10% increase in the number of events per one
million population is associated with a 2% increase in the hazard of adopting a stay-at-home
order (e0.21·log(1.1) ). When controlling for potential confounders, the results are significant
at the 99% confidence level and similarly sizable. More specifically, a 10% increase in the
number of events per one million population being is associated with a 3% increase in the
probability of adopting a stay-at-home order (e0.31·log(1.1) ).

Are Repressive States More Likely to Impose Stay-at-home Orders?
We now turn to examining whether countries that had used greater violence against civilians
in 2019 are more likely to implement stay-at-home orders compared to countries with no
recent history of using violence against civilians.
Table 2 reports a set of logistic regressions that model whether a stay-at-home order
has been adopted in the country as a function of the recent record of violence against civilians
in the year preceding the outbreak, as well as a relevant set of controls. Table 2 shows that
the reported coefficients are all positive and statistically significant. The estimated impact
of recent state repression is significant at the 90% confidence level for the unadjusted model
and significant at the 95% level in the fully-adjusted model when using either the number
of fatalities or the number of such events as the explanatory variable.
Overall, the models provide evidence that countries that have a recent record of
19

Table 2: Logistic regressions on the effect of recent state repression on adopting stay-at-home
orders

Adoption of a stay-at-home order
(1)

(2)

(3)

N of violent fatalities (log)
0.36∗ 0.40∗ 0.49∗∗
(per one million population) (0.19) (0.22) (0.23)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.51∗∗
(0.24)

N of violent events (log)
(per one million population)

0.34∗ 0.37∗ 0.47∗∗
(0.19) (0.22) (0.23)

0.53∗∗
(0.25)

0.03
0.47
(1.17) (1.22)

0.46
(1.34)

Democracy score (V-Dem)

0.11
0.56
(1.16) (1.22)

State Capacity

0.14 −0.44 −0.27
(0.38) (0.54) (0.59)

0.11 −0.47 −0.30
(0.38) (0.54) (0.58)

GDP per capita (log)

0.64
(0.40)

0.63
(0.45)

0.67
(0.41)

0.70
(0.46)

GDP Annual Growth

0.09
(0.08)

0.08
(0.08)

0.10
(0.08)

0.09
(0.08)

Population Density (’000)

−0.37 0.04
(0.88) (1.02)

−0.33 0.10
(0.87) (1.01)

Population aged 70
or older (percentage)

0.04
(0.12)

0.03
(0.12)

Diabetes prevalence

0.02
(0.09)

0.01
(0.09)

Cardiovascular death rate

0.002
(0.003)

0.002
(0.003)

Constant

Region FE
Observations

0.66
(1.34)

0.81∗∗ 0.84 −5.21 −5.79 0.78∗ 0.83 −5.58 −6.34
(0.39) (0.74) (3.88) (4.15) (0.42) (0.74) (3.95) (4.27)
Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

∗

Yes
129

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
129

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Standard errors in parenthesis. Region-Fixed Effects include:
Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, and South America.
20

violence against civilians before the pandemic, as measured by the number of unarmed
citizens killed in state-led actions, are more likely to adopt restrictive policies against the
COVID-19 than countries with no recent record of state violence.

Are Repressive States More Likely to Impose Longer Stay-at-home
Orders?
Lastly, we evaluate whether countries that had used violence against civilians in the months
preceding the beginning of the pandemics are more likely to impose longer stay-at-home
orders than countries with no recent history of using violence against civilians.
Table 3 estimates the effect of a recent history of state repression against civilians on
the length of stay-at-home orders in the country using an OLS model. The main explanatory
predictor in columns (1-4) is the log of the number of fatalities from state-led violence
against civilians, and in columns 5 through 8, it is the log of the number such events in
2019. As above, models are adjusted for major predictors of repression (regime type, state
capacity, economic development, economic growth, and population density) and countryspecific predictors of the pandemic risk (population aging and two indicators of pre-pandemic
health status). Because the main explanatory variables and the outcome measure are logtransformed, we can interpret the coefficients in terms of elasticities.
The results in Table 3 indicate that the log in the number of fatalities per one
million population is associated with the imposition of longer stay-at-home orders during
the pandemic across all models with a 99% confidence level. In the unadjusted model,
column 1 shows that a 10% increase in the number of fatalities per one million population
would lead to an increase in the length of stay-at-home orders of 2.1% (e0.22·log(1.1 ). In the
model that adjusts for political, economic, demographic and health status variables, this
positive association becomes even stronger. More specifically, Model 4 shows that a 10%
increase in the number of fatalities leads, on average, to an expected increase of the duration
of a stay-at-home order in place of 3% (e0.31·log(1.1 ).
21

Table 3: OLS regressions on the effect of recent violence against civilians on the length of
stay-at-home orders

Number of days with a stay-at-home order in the country (log)
(1)
N of violent fatalities (log)
0.22∗∗
(per one million population) (0.10)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.23∗∗
(0.12)

0.26∗∗
(0.13)

0.26∗∗
(0.12)

0.30∗∗
(0.13)

0.27∗∗ 0.28∗∗∗ 0.31∗∗∗
(0.11) (0.10) (0.11)

N of violent events (log)
(per one million population)
Democracy score (V-Dem)

−0.18
(0.89)

0.04
(0.87)

0.13
(1.05)

−0.19
(0.91)

0.04
(0.89)

0.12
(1.08)

State capacity

0.19
(0.27)

−0.37
(0.35)

−0.27
(0.34)

0.14
(0.27)

−0.41
(0.35)

−0.29
(0.34)

GDP per capita (log)

0.56∗∗
(0.24)

0.60∗
(0.34)

0.54∗∗
(0.24)

0.61∗
(0.34)

GDP Annual Growth

0.05
(0.06)

0.04
(0.06)

0.05
(0.06)

0.04
(0.06)

−0.37
(1.27)

(1.58)

−0.39
(1.22)

(1.53)

−0.68

Population Density (’000)

−0.67

Population aged 70 or older
(percentage)

0.004
(0.08)

−0.02
(0.08)

Diabetes prevalence

−0.01
(0.06)

−0.02
(0.06)

Cardiovascular death rate

0.001
(0.002)

0.001
(0.002)

Constant

Region FE
Observations

3.09∗∗∗ 3.15∗∗∗ −2.00
(0.20) (0.49) (2.38)
Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

∗

−2.52 3.04∗∗∗ 3.09∗∗∗
(3.13) (0.22) (0.49)
Yes
129

Yes
134

Yes
134

−2.01
(2.41)

−2.57
(3.12)

Yes
134

Yes
129

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Region-Fixed Effects
include: Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, and South America.
22

Table 3 also shows a positive association between the number of events involving
violence against civilians rather than the number of fatalities and the imposition of longer restrictive policies against the COVID-19. However these effects are only significant marginally
at the 90% confidence level. More specifically, the unadjusted model in column 5 indicates
that a 10% increase in the number of events per one million population would also imply an
expected increase in the length of stay-at-home orders of 2.2% (e0.23·log(1.1) ). After adjusting
for all covariates, Model 8 shows that a 10% increase in the number of fatalities would lead
to an expected increase of the duration of a stay-at-home order in place of 2.9% (e0.30·log(1.1) ).
We can illustrate the size of these effects using the country of Nigeria. Nigeria
experienced 1,454 fatalities in 756 violent events against civilians in 2019, which is equivalent
to 7.05 fatalities in 3.67 violent events per one million population.12 In this country, we
observe that the stay-at-home order was in place for 98 days during our period of study.
Using the fully-adjusted model in column 4, we then predict that if the number of civilian
fatalities per capita had been double—from 1.6 to 3.2 per one million population—we expect
the length of the stay-at-home order to have increased by about a month, from 98 days to
129 days (exp0.31·log(2) ×98). In parallel, if Nigeria had experienced the double of violent
events involving violence against civilians, we would expect an increase in the length of the
stay-at-home order by 28 days, from 98 to 126 days (e0.30·log(2) × 98).

Robustness Checks
This section documents the robustness checks for our main findings to different methodological decisions with regards to: (1) time-to-policy thresholds, (2) time windows of the
pre-outbreak measure of violence against civilians, (3) the actors involved in the violence
against civilians, and (4) the ACLED country coverage.
We start with checking the findings to different time-to-policy thresholds. The out12

Compared to the rest of our sample, Nigeria stands at the 61st percentile regarding the number of violent
events per one million

23

come measure in our survival plots and the Cox Proportional Hazard models rely on counting
the number of days from the first COVID-19 confirmed case to the imposition of a stay-athome order. We acknowledge that a first case might not necessarily lead to an upward
trend in the number of cases in the country or may simply reflect greater testing capabilities. To alleviate these concerns, the online Appendix C evaluates the robustness of our
findings to using different time-to-policy thresholds, namely the 10th COVID-19 confirmed
cases, the first 100th COVID-19 confirmed cases, the 1st COVID-19 confirmed death, and
the 10th COVID-19 confirmed case. None of our findings are sensitive to using a specific
time-to-policy threshold.
We then evaluate the robustness of our findings to the time windows used to measure
violence against civilians before the outbreak. For our main models, we measure a governments’ recent record of violence using the number of fatalities from violence against civilians
and the number of such events in 2019. However, some may consider that it would be more
precise to only measure violence that took place immediately before the pandemic outbreak.
We acknowledge that using the entire 2019, rather than the last three or six months is an
arbitrary decision. Hence, in online Appendix D, we examine the robustness of our findings
using different time windows for building that measure. We evaluate our findings when using
the last trimester of 2019 — October through December — as the time window to build our
indicator of state repression against civilians. Tables D.1, D.1, and D.3 re-evaluate hypotheses 1, 2, and 3. These models show that our main findings remain substantively unaltered
with regards to Hypothesis 1 and 3 when using the last trimester of 2019 — rather than the
entire year of 2019 — as the time window to measure state-led violence against civilians.
In other words, countries with a record of state violence in the last trimester of 2019 are
more likely to adopt stay-at-home orders earlier on and to keep them for a longer time span.
Meanwhile, though the overall effect on adopting a stay-at-home order at anytime during
our period of study is marginally significant at the 90% confidence level when using the
number of fatalities per one million population, it is not statistically significant when using

24

the number of violent events.
To address a separate issue with the robustness of our models, we note that our
measure of Violence against Civilians from ACLED excludes violent events perpetrated by
political organizations that aim at countering the established governing regimes (i.e., rebel
groups), or violence that arises from civilians themselves (e.g., riots and protests). Given
the methodological difficulties of accurately identifying the perpetrators of violence, we now
evaluate whether these decisions affect our findings. To do this, in online Appendix E,
we report the main findings using all Violence Against Civilians in the ACLED Dataset,
i.e., removing any actor-related filters. When using All Violence Against Civilians as a
measure of pre-outbreak domestic conflict, Tables E.1, E.2, and E.3 report evidence that
strongly supports Hypothesis 1, 2, and 3. Our conclusions from Hypotheses 1 and 3 remain
substantively unaltered. However, unlike the main models that only provided marginal
support for Hypothesis 2, Table E.2 yields significant coefficients for the impact of both the
number of fatalities and the number of violent events per one million population immediately
before the outbreak on adopting a stay-at-home order at any time throughout the period at
the 95% confidence level.
Further, our main measure includes violence directly perpetrated by the government,
as well as violence against civilians from political militias. This is sensible because state
repression often works indirectly through pro-government militias with indirect ties with
the government.13 However, this indicator might potentially include some violence from
pro-rebel militias or events with unknown political actor. To ensure that our findings are
not sensitive to this, in online Appendix F, we also re-estimate the main models using
only Violence Against Civilians that is known to be perpetrated by the state. None of our
findings are sensitive to including in the violence data only events that are known to be
directly perpetrated by the state.
13

ACLED defines political militias as political organizations defined by their goal of “influencing and
impacting governance, security and policy”. These groups “are not seeking the removal of a national power,
but are typically supported, armed by, or allied with a political elite and act towards a goal defined by these
elites or larger political movements.”

25

Finally, we note that the list of countries with available data in the ACLED in
2019 excludes significant world regions such as North America (United States and Canada),
Western Europe (e.g., France, Germany, United Kingdom), and Oceania (e.g., Australia,
New Zealand). The manner in which countries are missing from the data is not random: the
excluded countries tend to have governments that, on average, use less violence against their
citizens, are more democratic and developed, enjoy from greater state capacity, stronger
medical infrastructure and, for these and many other reasons, they could have responded
to the pandemics in a different way. Note that this missingness would impact our findings
if these countries would constitute a subset of world countries that have the least violence
against civilians and, at the same time, reacted earlier to the pandemics, were more likely to
adopt policies, and imposed policies for longer periods compared to countries in the ACLED
sample.
While we do not have the resources to build a fine-grained data on political violence
comparable to the ACLED for these out-of-sample countries, we evaluate the impact of their
inclusion by assuming that all countries outside of the ACLED have had no record of state
violence against citizens in 2019—this is the most conservative value of state repression in
these countries. We use the same data sources as described in the “Research Methods”
section to build the rest of the dependent and control variables. Using this new dataset of
up to 163 countries, the results reported in the online Appendix G show that the statistical
reliability of the main coefficients remain unaltered and the effects sizes become, if anything,
stronger. Overall, this evidence suggests that the convenience ACLED country sample is
unlikely to drive the main findings.

Discussion and Conclusions
This study has investigated whether countries with a recent record of state-led violence
against civilians are more likely to impose severe restrictions on the freedom of movement,

26

impose them earlier on, and impose them for longer periods. We expect these associations because governments that use violence against civilians may see restrictive preventive measures
not only as a tool to achieve public health objectives but also to control domestic challengers.
While we acknowledge that an empirical test of the true intentions of governments is not
possible, we have generated and empirically examined three empirical observations that are
consistent with our theoretical argument.
The evidence from Cox proportional hazards models of up to 134 countries indicates
that a record of state repression against civilians immediately before a COVID-19 outbreak
in a country is systematically associated with adopting a stay-at-home order on average more
than a week faster than countries that do not have a record of state repression. Logistic regressions also show that countries that have recently used violence against civilians have been
more likely to adopt stay-at-home orders at all compared to countries without this history.
Further, our results from our set of ordinal regressions with 134 countries also indicate that
states with recent repressive behavior are more likely to keep stay-at-home orders for longer
periods compared to states with no recent history of violence against civilians.
From a policy perspective, international organizations, such as the United Nations,
have recently raised initial concerns about how governments may use the COVID-19 pandemic as a pretext to heightened state repression and the violation of fundamental civil
liberties.14 Human rights organizations have also expressed similar concerns, warning how
state of emergency policies may be adopted by some governments with the intention to
undermine civil and political rights (Hammadi, 2020). In this vein, Sam Brownback, Ambassador at Large for International Religious Freedom from the U.S. Department of State,
has specifically warned that autocratic governments may be using the COVID-19 policies as
a tool for political repression, “imposing additional on already marginalized ethnic communities”. While international organizations, governments, and pundits alike may have raised
14

See the UN document submitted by Irene Kahn, the UN Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, A/HRC/44/49, and accessible on https:
//undocs.org/A/HRC/44/49.

27

concerns about the unwarranted use of extraordinary measures, our findings provide positive
and systematic evidence consistent with this argument. Overall, they indicate that the international community should closely monitor the adoption of stay-at-home orders to ensure
that the follow the standards of necessity and proportionality.
From a theoretical perspective, this paper improves our understanding of the relations between global crisis, the governmental response, and domestic dissidents, with specific
contributions to the literature. First, we offer new insights into the emerging literature of
the political and social causes and consequences of the COVID-19 and other pandemics.
Social scientists have, thus, far provided a wealth of research on the social and political
correlates of policy responses to the COVID-19 and the dynamics of the pandemics, including the effects of political regimes (Bosancianu, Dionne, Hilbig, Humphreys, Sampada,
Lieber and Scacco, 2020; Cepaluni, Dorsch and Branyiczki, 2020; Cronert, 2020; Frey, Chen
and Presidente, 2020), federal institutions (Buthe, Barceló, Cheng, Ganga, Messerschmidt,
Hartnett and Kubinec, 2020), partisanship (Kubinec, Carvalho, Cheng, Barceló, Hartnett,
Messerschmidt, Duba and Cottrell, 2020), political polarization (Allcott, Boxell, Conway,
Gentzkow, Thaler and Yang, 2020; Gadarian, Goodman and Pepinsky, 2020; Grossman, Kim,
Rexer and Thirumurthy, 2020; Makridis and Rothwell, 2020; van Holm, Monaghan, Shahar,
Messina and Surprenant, 2020), institutional trust (Goldstein and Wiedemann, 2020), institutional messaging (Arriola and Grossman, 2020; Everett, Colombatto, Chituc, Brady and
Crockett, 2020), state capacity (Bosancianu et al., 2020; Cronert, 2020; Frey, Chen and Presidente, 2020), social norms (Barceló and Sheen, 2020; Goldberg, Gustafson, Maibach, van der
Linden, Ballew, Bergquist, Kotcher, Marlon, Rosenthal and Leiserowitz, 2020), among many
others. The present study contributes to this emerging literature by demonstrating how recent history of political violence can explain cross-country variation in government responses
to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Further, this paper also contributes to the literature of the dynamics of political
violence in times of crisis, in particular health crises. Prior work had considered when and

28

how disasters (e.g., droughts, floodings, earthquakes, fires) impact political violence (Koubi,
2019; Salehyan, 2008). For instance, Wood and Wright (2016) suggest that state disasters
increase grievances and decrease state control, encouraging dissident action and leading to
state repression. Others, however, have posited that the relationship is conditional on the
pre-existing state-citizen relationship (Detges, 2017), the post-disaster reconstruction efforts
(Kikuta, 2019), distribution of aid (De Juan, Pierskalla and Schwarz, 2020) and pre-disaster
structural conditions (Lehrs, this issue).
Our empirical assessment also contributes to the understanding of the use of collective state repression tools, such as lockdowns and curfews, when formally used for nonmilitary purposes. There is rich literature studying the consequences of indiscriminate state
repression (Condra and Shapiro, 2012), and a recent study looking at the political consequences of curfews (Aksoy, Menger and Tavits, 2020). Our findings speak to their endogenous
implementation when used for non-military purposes. Even amidst a global pandemic, we
find that the adoption of stay-at-home orders is associated with pre-existing state behavior
that is critical to consider in order to understand the consequences of such policies.
Recent research on the effect on disasters have also looked beyond the state and
analysed the impact of disasters and violence against civilians by non-state actors. It has
found that disasters lead to a decrease in violence by non-state actors against civilians in the
short term, but that such violence increases in the recovery phase (Haer and RezaeeDaryakenar, this issue). Further, rebels from impacted territory are more likely to seek negotiations
with the government when weakened by disaster (Nemeth and Lai, this issue). However,
when focusing on the impact of COVID-19, research on violence by pro-government nonstate actors (PGN) has found that attacks on civilians increased with COVID-19 prevalence
compared to the previous year due to PGNs providing an alternative to state militaries deployed to contested spaces to establish pro-government support and thwart rebellion during
the pandemic (Koehnlein and Kore, this issue). While further research allows for exploration
of the relationship between state and non-state actors and violence on civilians during the

29

pandemic, we contribute to this literature by showing that states respond to a global health
disaster depending on their political incentives to repress their citizens. This might be particularly important for disasters that call for policies that are observationally equivalent to
policies commonly used to deter domestic dissent such as lockdowns and curfews.
In this regard, the logic of our argument can be extended to other disasters beyond
pandemics that may also call for stay-at-home orders. For instance, we might expect that
government with underlying incentives to oppress their citizens might be more likely to embrace restrictive policies when environmental conditions predict disasters such as hurricanes,
volcanic eruptions, and storms, which usually require residents to stay at home for days and
even weeks. Beyond naturally occurring events, abusive authorities could also see an opportunity to implement particularly restrictive measures in events of significant air pollution
(e.g., wildfire smoke) and radioactivity hazards. Though further research will be required to
ascertain whether our logic may extend to these other types of disasters, given that climate
change-induced disasters are only likely to increase over time, the importance of such work
cannot be overstated.

References
Acemoglu, Daron and James A Robinson. 2000. “Democratization or repression?” European
Economic Review 44(4-6):683–693.
Afesorgbor, Sylvanus Kwaku. 2019. “The impact of economic sanctions on international
trade: How do threatened sanctions compare with imposed sanctions?” European Journal
of Political Economy 56:11–26.
Aksoy, Deniz, Andrew Menger and Margit Tavits. 2020. “The Effect of Curfews on Political
Preferences.”.
URL: shorturl.at/EFM36
Allcott, Hunt, Levi Boxell, Jacob Conway, Matthew Gentzkow, Michael Thaler and David Y

30

Yang. 2020. “Polarization and public health: Partisan differences in social distancing
during the Coronavirus pandemic.” NBER Working Paper (w26946).
Appel, Benjamin J. 2018. “In the Shadow of the International Criminal Court: Does the
ICC Deter Human Rights Violations?” Journal of Conflict Resolution 62(1):3–28.
Arriola, Leonardo R and Allison N Grossman. 2020. “Ethnic marginalization and (non)
compliance in public health emergencies.” The Journal of Politics .
URL: https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/710784
Bank, World. 2020. “World Development Indicators Online database.”.
URL: https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/dataset/world-development-indicators
Barceló, Joan. 2018. “Batons and ballots: The effectiveness of state violence in fighting
against Catalan separatism.” Research & Politics 5(2):1–9.
Barceló, Joan and Greg Sheen. 2020. “Voluntary adoption of social welfare-enhancing behavior: Mask-wearing in Spain during the COVID-19 outbreak.”.
URL: osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/6m85q
Blankenship, Brian. 2018. “When do states take the bait? State capacity and the provocation
logic of terrorism.” Journal of Conflict Resolution 62(2):381–409.
Bosancianu, Constantin Manuel, Kim Yi Dionne, Hanno Hilbig, Macartan Humphreys, KC
Sampada, Nils Lieber and Alexandra Scacco. 2020. “Political and Social Correlates of
Covid-19 Mortality.”.
URL: https://osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/ub3zd/
Brass, Paul R. 2006. “Collective violence, human rights, and the politics of curfew.” Journal
of Human Rights 5(3):323–340.
Bueno de Mesquita, Ethan and Eric S Dickson. 2007. “The propaganda of the deed: Terrorism, counterterrorism, and mobilization.” American Journal of Political Science 51(2):364–
381.
Buthe, Tim, Joan Barceló, Cindy Cheng, Paula Ganga, Luca Messerschmidt, Allison Spencer

31

Hartnett and Robert Kubinec. 2020. “Patterns of Policy Responses to the COVID-19
Pandemic in Federal vs. Unitary European Democracies.” Available at SSRN 3692035 .
Cepaluni, Gabriel, Michael Dorsch and Réka Branyiczki. 2020. “Political Regimes and Deaths
in the Early Stages of the COVID-19 Pandemic.” Available at SSRN 3586767 .
Cheng, Cindy, Joan Barceló, Allison Spencer Hartnett, Robert Kubinec and Luca Messerschmidt. 2020. “CoronaNet COVID-19 Government Response Event.” Nature human behaviour 4(7):756–768.
Condra, Luke N and Jacob N Shapiro. 2012. “Who takes the blame? The strategic effects
of collateral damage.” American Journal of Political Science 56(1):167–187.
Conley, Bridget and Chad Hazlett. 2019. “How very massive atrocities end: A dataset and
typology.”.
Cronert, Axel. 2020. “Democracy, state capacity, and covid-19 related school closures.”.
URL: https://preprints.apsanet.org/engage/apsa/article-details/5e80bf4c6a2482001a4c1b9f
Davenport, Christian. 2007. “State repression and political order.” Annual Review of Political
Science 10:1–23.
De Juan, Alexander, Jan Pierskalla and Elisa Schwarz. 2020. “Natural disasters, aid distribution, and social conflict–Micro-level evidence from the 2015 earthquake in Nepal.”
World Development 126:104715.
DeMeritt, Jacqueline HR. 2012. “International organizations and government killing: does
naming and shaming save lives?” International Interactions 38(5):597–621.
Detges, Adrien. 2017. “Droughts, state-citizen relations and support for political violence in
Sub-Saharan Africa: A micro-level analysis.” Political Geography 61:88–98.
Donno, Daniela and Michael Neureiter. 2018. “Can human rights conditionality reduce
repression? Examining the European Union’s economic agreements.” The Review of International Organizations 13(3):335–357.
Earl, Jennifer, Sarah A Soule and John D McCarthy. 2003. “Protests under fire? Explaining
protest policing.” American Sociological Review 69(4):581–606.

32

Escribà-Folch, Abel and Joseph Wright. 2010.

“Dealing with Tyranny: International

Sanctions and the Survival of Authoritarian Rulers1.” International Studies Quarterly
54(2):335–359.
Everett, Jim AC, Clara Colombatto, Vladimir Chituc, William J Brady and Molly Crockett.
2020. “The effectiveness of moral messages on public health behavioral intentions during
the COVID-19 pandemic.”.
URL: https://psyarxiv.com/9yqs8/
Flaxman, Seth, Swapnil Mishra, Axel Gandy, H Juliette T Unwin, Thomas A Mellan, Helen
Coupland, Charles Whittaker, Harrison Zhu, Tresnia Berah, Jeffrey W Eaton et al. 2020.
“Estimating the effects of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in Europe.”
Nature 584(7820):257–261.
Frey, Carl Benedikt, Chinchih Chen and Giorgio Presidente. 2020. “Democracy, Culture,
and Contagion: Political Regimes and Countries Responsiveness to Covid-19.”.
URL: https://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/academic/Democracy-Culture-andContagionM ay13.pdf
Gadarian, Shana Kushner, Sara Wallace Goodman and Thomas B Pepinsky. 2020. “Partisanship, health behavior, and policy attitudes in the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic.”
Available at SSRN 3562796 .
Goldberg, Matthew, Abel Gustafson, Edward Maibach, Sander van der Linden, Matthew T
Ballew, Parrish Bergquist, John Kotcher, Jennifer R Marlon, Seth Rosenthal and Anthony
Leiserowitz. 2020. “Social norms motivate COVID-19 preventive behaviors.”.
URL: https://psyarxiv.com/9whp4
Goldstein, Daniel and Johannes Wiedemann. 2020. “Who Do You Trust? The Consequences
of Partisanship and Trust in Government for Public Responsiveness to COVID-19.” Available at SSRN 3580547 .
Goldstein, Robert Justin. 1978. Political repression in modern America from 1870 to the
present. Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press.

33

Graff, Violette, Juliette Galonnier et al. 2012. Hindu-Muslim Communal Riots in India II
(1986-2011). Paris: Sciences Po.
Gregory, Paul R, Philipp JH Schröder and Konstantin Sonin. 2011. “Rational dictators and
the killing of innocents: Data from Stalin’s archives.” Journal of Comparative Economics
39(1):34–42.
Grossman, Guy, Soojong Kim, Jonah Rexer and Harsha Thirumurthy. 2020. “Political
partisanship influences behavioral responses to governors’ recommendations for COVID19 prevention in the United States.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .
URL: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2007835117
Gruffydd-Jones, Jamie J. 2019. “Citizens and condemnation: Strategic uses of international
human rights pressure in authoritarian states.” Comparative Political Studies 52(4):579–
612.
Gurr, Ted Robert. 1986. The Political Origins of State Violence and Terror: A Theoretical
Analysis. In Government Violence and Repression: An Agenda for Research, ed. Michael
Stohl and George A. Lopez. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press chapter 10, pp. 45–71.
Haer, Roos and Babak RezaeeDaryakenari. 2020. “Disasters and civilian victimization: exploring its dynamic effect.” Draft manuscript .
Hafner-Burton, Emilie M. 2005. “Trading human rights: How preferential trade agreements
influence government repression.” International Organization 59(3):593–629.
Hafner-Burton, Emilie M. 2011. Forced to be good: Why trade agreements boost human
rights. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Hafner-Burton, Emilie M and Kiyoteru Tsutsui. 2005. “Human rights in a globalizing world:
The paradox of empty promises.” American Journal of Sociology 110(5):1373–1411.
Hammadi, Saad. 2020. “World Press Freedom Day: COVID-19 must not be a pathogen of
repression.” Amnesty International [Accessed: May 9, 2020].
URL:

https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2020/05/covid-19-must-not-be-a-

pathogen-of-repression/

34

Hill Jr, Daniel W and Zachary M Jones. 2014. “An empirical evaluation of explanations for
state repression.” American Political Science Review 108(3):661–687.
Hillebrecht, Courtney. 2014. “The power of human rights tribunals: Compliance with the
European Court of Human Rights and domestic policy change.” European Journal of
International Relations 20(4):1100–1123.
Hufbauer, Gary Clyde, Jeffrey J Schott, Kimberly Ann Elliott et al. 1990. Economic Sanctions Reconsidered: History and Current Policy. Washington DC: Institute for International Economics.
Kalyvas, Stathis N. 2006. The logic of violence in civil war. Cambridge and New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Kikuta, Kyosuke. 2019. “Postdisaster reconstruction as a cause of intrastate violence: an
instrumental variable analysis with application to the 2004 tsunami in Sri Lanka.” Journal
of Conflict Resolution 63(3):760–785.
Koehnlein, Brittney and Ore Koren. 2020. “COVID-19, state capacity, and political violence
by nonstate actors.” Draft manuscript .
Koubi, Vally. 2019. “Climate change and conflict.” Annual Review of Political Science
22:343–360.
Krain, Matthew. 2012. “J’accuse! Does naming and shaming perpetrators reduce the severity
of genocides or politicides?” International Studies Quarterly 56(3):574–589.
Kreps, David M, Paul Milgrom, John Roberts and Robert Wilson. 1982. “Rational cooperation in the finitely repeated prisoners’ dilemma.” Journal of Economic theory 27(2):245–
252.
Kreps, David M and Robert Wilson. 1982. “Reputation and imperfect information.” Journal
of Economic Theory 27(2):253–279.
Kubinec, Robert, Luiz Max Carvalho, Cindy Cheng, Joan Barceló, Allison Spencer Hartnett,
Luca Messerschmidt, Derek Duba and Matthew Sean Cottrell. 2020. “Partisanship and
the Spread of COVID-19 in the United States.”.

35

Lauria-Santiago, Aldo A and Jeffrey L Gould. 2008. To rise in darkness: Revolution, repression, and memory in El Salvador, 1920–1932. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Lebovic, James H and Erik Voeten. 2009. “The cost of shame: International organizations
and foreign aid in the punishing of human rights violators.” Journal of Peace Research
46(1):79–97.
Lehrs, Lior. 2020. “Conflict and peace in the age of Coronavirus: Israel-Palestine as a case
study.” Draft manuscript .
Lyall, Jason. 2009. “Does indiscriminate violence incite insurgent attacks? Evidence from
Chechnya.” Journal of Conflict Resolution 53(3):331–362.
Makhovsky, Andrei. 2020. “Shunning virus lockdown, defiant Belarus stages Victory Day
parade.” Reuters [Accessed: May 9, 2020].
URL:

https://www.reuters.com/article/us-ww2-anniversary-belarus-victory-

day/shunning-virus-lockdown-defiant-belarus-stages-victory-day-parade-idUSKBN22L0H5
Makridis, Christos and Jonathan T Rothwell. 2020. “The Real Cost of Political Polarization:
Evidence from the COVID-19 Pandemic.” Available at SSRN 3638373 .
Marfleet, Philip. 2016. Egypt: Contested Revolution. London: Pluto Press.
Moore, Will H. 2000. “The repression of dissent: A substitution model of government
coercion.” Journal of Conflict Resolution 44(1):107–127.
Murdie, Amanda M and David R Davis. 2012. “Shaming and blaming: Using events data to
assess the impact of human rights INGOs.” International Studies Quarterly 56(1):1–16.
Nemeth, Stephen and Brian Lai. 2020. “When do natural disasters lead to negotiations in a
civil war?” Draft manuscript .
Nordås, Ragnhild and Christian Davenport. 2013. “Fight the youth: Youth bulges and state
repression.” American Journal of Political Science 57(4):926–940.
Pavey, Eleanor. 2008. “The massacres in Sri Lanka during the Black July riots of 1983.”
Online Encyclopedia of Mass Violence 13.
Peksen, Dursun and A. Cooper Drury. 2009. “Economic Sanctions and Political Repression:

36

Assessing the Impact of Coercive Diplomacy on Political Freedoms.” Human Rights Review
10(3):393–411.
Pierskalla, Jan Henryk. 2010. “Protest, deterrence, and escalation: The strategic calculus of
government repression.” Journal of Conflict Resolution 54(1):117–145.
Raleigh, Clionadh, Andrew Linke, Håvard Hegre and Joakim Karlsen. 2010. “Introducing
ACLED: an armed conflict location and event dataset: special data feature.” Journal of
Peace Research 47(5):651–660.
Regan, Patrick M and Errol A Henderson. 2002. “Democracy, threats and political repression
in developing countries: are democracies internally less violent?” Third World Quarterly
23(1):119–136.
Ritter, Emily Hencken. 2014. “Policy disputes, political survival, and the onset and severity
of state repression.” Journal of Conflict Resolution 58(1):143–168.
Ritter, Emily Hencken, Courtenay R Conrad et al. 2016. “Preventing and responding to dissent: The observational challenges of explaining strategic repression.” American Political
Science Review 110(1):85–99.
Rozenas, Arturas. 2020. “A theory of demographically targeted repression.” Journal of
Conflict Resolution 64(6-7):1254–1278.
Salehyan, Idean. 2008. “From climate change to conflict? No consensus yet.” Journal of
Peace Research 45(3):315–326.
Shadmehr, Mehdi and Dan Bernhardt. 2015. “State Censorship.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 7(2):280–307.
Teorell, Jan, Michael Coppedge, Staffan Lindberg and Svend-Erik Skaaning. 2019. “Measuring polyarchy across the globe, 1900–2017.” Studies in Comparative International Development 54(1):71–95.
Terman, Rochelle and Erik Voeten. 2018. “The relational politics of shame: Evidence from
the universal periodic review.” The Review of International Organizations 13(1):1–23.

37

Valentino, Benjamin A. 2014. “Why we kill: The political science of political violence against
civilians.” Annual Review of Political Science 17:89–103.
van Holm, Eric, Jake Monaghan, Dan C Shahar, JP Messina and Chris Surprenant. 2020.
“The impact of political ideology on concern and behavior during covid-19.” Available at
SSRN 3573224 .
Walter, Barbara F. 2006. “Building reputation: Why governments fight some separatists
but not others.” American Journal of Political Science 50(2):313–330.
Wood, Reed M. 2008. ““A Hand upon the Throat of the Nation”: Economic Sanctions and
State Repression, 1976-2001.” International Studies Quarterly 52(3):489–513.
Wood, Reed M and Thorin M Wright. 2016. “Responding to catastrophe: Repression dynamics following rapid-onset natural disasters.” Journal of Conflict Resolution 60(8):1446–
1472.

38

Online Appendix to:
“Suppression and Timing: Using COVID-19 Policies
against Political Dissidents?”
Contents
A List of countries

3

B Descriptive statistics

4

C Robustness Checks to Different Time-to-policy Thresholds

5

C.1 Robustness to varying time-to-policy thresholds (Summary table) . . . . . .

6

C.2 Time to policy after the 10th confirmed COVID-19 case . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

C.3 Time to policy after the 100th confirmed COVID-19 case . . . . . . . . . . .

8

C.4 Time to policy after the 1st confirmed COVID-19 death . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

C.5 Time to policy after the 10th confirmed COVID-19 death . . . . . . . . . . .

10

D Robustness to Measuring Violence using a Different Time Window

11

D.1 Re-evaluating Hypothesis 1 using the last three months of 2019 to measure
violence against civilians . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

D.2 Re-evaluating Hypothesis 2 using the last three months of 2019 to measure
violence against civilians . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

D.3 Re-evaluating Hypothesis 3 using the last three months of 2019 to measure
violence against civilians . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E Robustness Checks to Using All Violence Against Civilians

16
18

E.1 Re-evaluating Hypothesis 1 Using All Violence Against Civilians . . . . . . .

19

E.2 Re-evaluating Hypothesis 2 Using All Violence Against Civilians . . . . . . .

21

E.3 Re-evaluating Hypothesis 3 Using All Violence Against Civilians . . . . . . .

23

1

F Robustness Checks to Using Violence Against Civilians that is Known to
Come from the State Only

25

F.1 Re-evaluating Hypothesis 1 Using Only Known State-led Repression . . . . .

26

F.2 Re-evaluating Hypothesis 2 Using Only Known State-led Repression . . . . .

28

F.3 Re-evaluating Hypothesis 3 Using Only Known State-led Repression . . . . .

30

G Robustness Checks to Using a More Comprehensive Country Sample

32

G.1 Re-evaluating Hypothesis 1 with an expanded country sample . . . . . . . .

33

G.2 Re-evaluating Hypothesis 2 with an expanded country sample . . . . . . . .

34

G.3 Re-evaluating Hypothesis 3 with an expanded country sample . . . . . . . .

36

2

A

List of countries

Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina ,Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Republic of Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali,
Mauritania, Mexico, Moldova, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palestine, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, South Korea, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syria, Taiwan, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.

3

B

Descriptive statistics
Table B.1: Descriptive statistics

Variable name

Mean

(SD)

Min ⇒ Max

N

Time of policy adoption since first case (in days)

42.2

(43.3)

0 ⇒ 162

134

Policy adoption dummy

0.78

(0.42)

0⇒1

134

Length of policy adoption (in days)

61

(42.2)

0 ⇒ 131

134

Number of fatalities

306.2

(1,359)

0 ⇒ 14,708

134

Number of fatalities (per one million population)

12.30

(32.9)

0 ⇒ 221.3

134

Number of events

286.8

(1,095)

0 ⇒ 11,514

134

Number of events (per one million population)

12.47

(31.12)

0 ⇒ 236.4

134

Democracy score (V-Dem)

0.47

(0.23)

0.02 ⇒ 0.89

134

State Capacity

0.39

(0.80)

-2.45 ⇒ 1.35

134

GDP per capita

13,043

(15,319)

661.2 ⇒ 116,935.6

134

GDP Growth

2.69

(3.18)

-10.8 ⇒ 9.40

134

Population density

148.6

(237.2)

1.98 ⇒ 1,935.9

134

Population aged 70 or older (%)

4.14

(3.25)

0.53 ⇒ 18.49

131

Diabetes prevalence

7.76

(3.82)

0.99 ⇒ 17.72

132

Cardiovascular death rate

279.4

(115.4)

79.37 ⇒ 724.4

133

4

C

Robustness Checks to Different Time-to-policy Thresholds

5

C.1

Robustness to varying time-to-policy thresholds (Summary
table)

Table C.1: Cox proportional hazards models of estimating the effect of recent state repression
on the timing of policy adoption with varying time-to-policy thresholds
Days from 10th COVID-19 confirmed case to stay-at-home order
N of violent fatalities (log) 0.22∗∗∗ 0.18∗∗ 0.23∗∗∗ 0.23∗∗
(per one million population) (0.07) (0.08) (0.08) (0.09)
N of violent events (log)
0.23∗∗∗ 0.18∗∗ 0.27∗∗∗
(0.08) (0.09) (0.10)
(per one million population)

0.29∗∗∗
(0.11)

Days from 100th COVID-19 confirmed case to stay-at-home order
N of violent fatalities (log) 0.20∗∗∗ 0.16∗ 0.18∗∗ 0.20∗∗
(per one million population) (0.07) (0.08) (0.08) (0.09)
N of violent events (log)
0.23∗∗∗ 0.19∗∗ 0.23∗∗
(0.08) (0.10) (0.10)
(per one million population)

0.28∗∗∗
(0.11)

Days from 1st COVID-19 confirmed death to stay-at-home order
N of violent fatalities (log)
0.18∗∗ 0.16∗ 0.18∗∗ 0.19∗∗
(per one million population) (0.07) (0.08) (0.08) (0.09)
N of violent events (log)
0.20∗∗ 0.18∗ 0.23∗∗
(per one million population)
(0.08) (0.10) (0.10)

0.27∗∗
(0.11)

Days from 10th COVID-19 confirmed death to stay-at-home order
N of violent fatalities (log)
0.16∗∗ 0.15∗ 0.17∗∗ 0.18∗∗
(per one million population) (0.07) (0.08) (0.08) (0.09)
N of violent events (log)
0.18∗∗ 0.18∗ 0.22∗∗
(per one million population)
(0.08) (0.09) (0.10)

Political controls
Economic controls
Demographic controls
Region FE
Observations

No
No
No
Yes
134

Yes
No
No
Yes
134

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
134

∗

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
129

No
No
No
Yes
134

Yes
No
No
Yes
134

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
134

0.25∗∗
(0.11)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
129

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. SE in parenthesis. Region-FE include: Africa, Asia, Europe,
North America, and South America. See full models in the following Appendices.

6

C.2

Time to policy after the 10th confirmed COVID-19 case

Table C.2: Cox proportional hazards models of estimating the effect of recent state repression
on the time to adopting a stay-at-home order (10th confirmed case)
Days from 10th COVID-19 confirmed case to stay-at-home order
(1)

(2)

(3)

N of violent fatalities (log) 0.22∗∗∗ 0.18∗∗ 0.23∗∗∗
(per one million population) (0.07) (0.08) (0.08)

(4)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.23∗∗∗ 0.18∗∗
(0.08) (0.09)

0.27∗∗∗
(0.10)

0.29∗∗∗
(0.11)

0.30
(0.57)

0.58
(0.60)

0.60
(0.67)

0.23∗∗
(0.09)

N of violent events (log)
(per one million population)
0.57
(0.59)

(5)

Democracy score (V-Dem)

0.30
(0.57)

0.65
(0.66)

State capacity

−0.24 −0.57∗∗ −0.46∗
(0.19) (0.23) (0.25)

−0.26 −0.61∗∗∗ −0.49∗∗
(0.19) (0.23)
(0.25)

GDP per capita (log)

0.40∗∗
(0.16)

0.41∗∗
(0.18)

0.45∗∗∗
(0.16)

0.48∗∗
(0.19)

GDP annual growth

0.06
(0.04)

0.04
(0.05)

0.07
(0.04)

0.06
(0.05)

Population density (’000)

−0.03
(0.45)

0.12
(0.45)

−0.05
(0.47)

0.11
(0.47)

Population aged 70
or older (percentage)

−0.02
(0.06)

−0.03
(0.06)

Diabetes prevalence

−0.004
(0.04)

−0.01
(0.04)

Cardiovascular death rate

0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)

Region FE
Observations

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

∗

Yes
129

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Standard errors in parenthesis. Region-Fixed Effects include:
Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, and South America.

7

Yes
129

C.3

Time to policy after the 100th confirmed COVID-19 case

Table C.3: Cox proportional hazards models of estimating the effect of recent state repression
on the time to adopting a stay-at-home order (100th confirmed case)
Days from 100th COVID-19 confirmed case to stay-at-home order
(1)

(2)

(3)

N of violent fatalities (log) 0.20∗∗∗ 0.16∗ 0.18∗∗
(per one million population) (0.07) (0.08) (0.08)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.23∗∗∗ 0.19∗∗
(0.08) (0.10)

0.23∗∗
(0.10)

0.28∗∗∗
(0.11)

0.53
(0.58)

0.47
(0.63)

0.20∗∗
(0.09)

N of violent events (log)
(per one million population)
Democracy score (V-Dem)

0.33
0.51
(0.55) (0.58)

0.50
(0.63)

0.34
(0.55)

State capacity

−0.19 −0.44∗
(0.18) (0.23)

−0.32
(0.25)

−0.19 −0.46∗∗
(0.18) (0.23)

GDP per capita (log)

0.26
(0.16)

0.29
(0.18)

0.30∗
(0.16)

0.36∗∗
(0.19)

GDP annual growth

0.04
(0.04)

0.03
(0.04)

0.05
(0.04)

0.04
(0.04)

Population density (’000)

0.12
(0.43)

0.29
(0.43)

0.13
(0.44)

0.32
(0.45)

−0.33
(0.25)

Population aged 70
or older (percentage)

−0.02
(0.06)

−0.03
(0.06)

Diabetes prevalence

−0.02
(0.04)

−0.03
(0.04)

Cardiovascular death rate

0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)

Region FE
Observations

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

∗

Yes
129

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Standard errors in parenthesis. Region-Fixed Effects include:
Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, and South America.

8

Yes
129

C.4

Time to policy after the 1st confirmed COVID-19 death

Table C.4: Cox proportional hazards models of estimating the effect of recent state repression
on the time to adopting a stay-at-home order (1st confirmed death)
Days from 1st COVID-19 confirmed death to stay-at-home order
(1)

(2)

(3)

N of violent fatalities (log) 0.18∗∗ 0.16∗ 0.18∗∗
(per one million population) (0.07) (0.08) (0.08)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.19∗∗
(0.09)

N of violent events (log)
(per one million population)

0.20∗∗ 0.18∗ 0.23∗∗
(0.08) (0.10) (0.10)

0.27∗∗
(0.11)

Democracy score (V-Dem)

0.31
0.48
(0.58) (0.61)

0.50
(0.67)

0.33
0.51
(0.58) (0.61)

0.44
(0.68)

State capacity

−0.11 −0.31 −0.21
(0.18) (0.23) (0.25)

−0.09 −0.32
(0.19) (0.23)

−0.21
(0.25)

GDP per capita (log)

0.26
(0.16)

0.27
(0.18)

0.29∗
(0.16)

0.34∗
(0.19)

GDP annual growth

0.04
(0.04)

0.03
(0.04)

0.05
(0.04)

0.04
(0.04)

Population density (’000)

−0.23 −0.09
(0.47) (0.46)

−0.28
(0.49)

−0.12
(0.48)

Population aged 70
or older (percentage)

−0.02
(0.06)

−0.02
(0.06)

Diabetes prevalence

−0.01
(0.04)

−0.02
(0.04)

Cardiovascular death rate

0.0003
(0.001)

0.0002
(0.001)

Region FE
Observations

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

∗

Yes
129

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
129

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Standard errors in parenthesis. Region-Fixed Effects include:
Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, and South America.

9

C.5

Time to policy after the 10th confirmed COVID-19 death

Table C.5: Cox proportional hazards models of estimating the effect of recent state repression
on the time to adopting a stay-at-home order (10th confirmed death)
Days from 10th COVID-19 confirmed death to stay-at-home order
(1)

(2)

(3)

N of violent fatalities (log) 0.16∗∗ 0.15∗ 0.17∗∗
(per one million population) (0.07) (0.08) (0.08)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.18∗∗
(0.09)

N of violent events (log)
(per one million population)

0.18∗∗ 0.18∗ 0.22∗∗
(0.08) (0.09) (0.10)

0.25∗∗
(0.11)

Democracy score (V-Dem)

0.19
0.35
(0.56) (0.59)

0.41
(0.64)

0.20
0.37
(0.56) (0.59)

0.38
(0.64)

State Capacity

−0.04 −0.22 −0.12
(0.18) (0.23) (0.25)

−0.04 −0.23
(0.18) (0.23)

−0.12
(0.25)

GDP per capita (log)

0.20
(0.16)

0.20
(0.18)

0.24
(0.16)

0.27
(0.19)

GDP annual growth

0.03
(0.04)

0.02
(0.04)

0.04
(0.04)

0.03
(0.04)

Population density (’000)

−0.11 −0.02
(0.45) (0.44)

−0.16
(0.46)

−0.07
(0.46)

Population aged 70
or older (percentage)

−0.04
(0.06)

−0.04
(0.06)

Diabetes prevalence

−0.01
(0.04)

−0.02
(0.04)

Cardiovascular death rate

0.0002
(0.001)

0.0002
(0.001)

Region FE
Observations

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

∗

Yes
129

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Standard errors in parenthesis. Region-Fixed Effects include: Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, and South America.

10

Yes
129

D

Robustness to Measuring Violence using a Different
Time Window

In this Appendix, we evaluate the robustness of our findings to the use of different timeframes to measure violence against civilians immediately before the outbreak. In the main
text, we employed the number of civilians fatalities involved in state-directed violence against
civilians in 2019.
Because the specific period to build our measure is rather arbitrary, we re-evaluate
the findings of our three hypotheses to using the three months preceding the first confirmed
global case—October, November, and December of 2019— in our measure of violence against
civilians:
• For a re-evaluation of Hypothesis 1, see Appendix D.1.
• For a re-evaluation of Hypothesis 2, see Appendix D.2.
• For a re-evaluation of Hypothesis 3, see Appendix D.3.

11

D.1

Re-evaluating Hypothesis 1 using the last three months of
2019 to measure violence against civilians

12

Table D.1: Cox proportional hazards models of estimating the effect of recent state repression
in the last three months of 2019 on the time to adopting a stay-at-home order
Days from first COVID-19 confirmed case to stay-at-home order
(1)

(2)

(3)

N of violent fatalities (log) 0.34∗∗∗ 0.29∗∗ 0.35∗∗∗
(per one million population) (0.12) (0.13) (0.13)

(4)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.27∗∗ 0.21∗
(0.12) (0.13)

0.30∗∗
(0.13)

0.35∗∗
(0.14)

0.13
(0.55)

0.43
(0.58)

0.42
(0.64)

0.39∗∗∗
(0.14)

N of violent events (log)
(per one million population)
0.46
(0.58)

(5)

Democracy score (V-Dem)

0.17
(0.55)

0.45
(0.64)

State Capacity

−0.21 −0.57∗∗ −0.45∗
(0.18) (0.23) (0.25)

−0.24 −0.59∗∗ −0.46∗
(0.18) (0.23) (0.25)

GDP per capita (log)

0.41∗∗
(0.17)

0.43∗∗
(0.19)

0.41∗∗
(0.17)

0.46∗∗
(0.19)

GDP annual growth

0.05
(0.04)

0.04
(0.05)

0.05
(0.04)

0.04
(0.05)

Population Density (’000)

−0.05
(0.45)

0.11
(0.46)

−0.13
(0.48)

0.02
(0.48)

Population aged 70 or older
(percentage)

−0.02
(0.06)

−0.03
(0.06)

Diabetes prevalence

−0.02
(0.04)

−0.03
(0.04)

Cardiovascular death rate

0.001
(0.001)

0.0004
(0.001)

Region FE
N countries

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

∗

Yes
129

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Positive coefficients in the Cox PH indicate that policies
were adopter earlier. Region-Fixed Effects include: Africa, Asia, Europe, North America,
and South America.

13

Yes
129

D.2

Re-evaluating Hypothesis 2 using the last three months of
2019 to measure violence against civilians

14

Table D.2: Logistic regressions on the effect of recent state repression on adopting stay-athome orders
Adoption of a stay-at-home order
(1)

(2)

(3)

N of violent fatalities (log)
0.54∗
0.56 0.63∗
(per one million population) (0.32) (0.35) (0.37)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.44
(0.28)

0.44
(0.30)

0.49
(0.32)

0.53
(0.34)

0.21
(0.99)

0.44
(1.05)

0.37
(1.22)

0.68∗
(0.38)

N of violent events (log)
(per one million population)
Democracy score (V-Dem)

0.19
0.43
(0.99) (1.06)

State Capacity

0.06 −0.44 −0.27
(0.32) (0.52) (0.55)

−0.005 −0.48 −0.30
(0.31) (0.51) (0.54)

GDP per capita (log)

0.46
(0.33)

0.54
(0.41)

0.45
(0.33)

0.54
(0.41)

GDP annual growth

0.07
(0.08)

0.05
(0.08)

0.07
(0.08)

0.05
(0.08)

Population Density (’000)

−0.68 −0.14
(0.79) (0.90)

−0.75 −0.24
(0.80) (0.89)

Population aged 70 or older
(percentage)

−0.002
(0.09)

−0.01
(0.09)

Diabetes prevalence

−0.04
(0.08)

−0.04
(0.08)

Cardiovascular death rate

0.002
(0.002)

0.001
(0.002)

Constant

Region FE
Observations

0.37
(1.21)

1.01∗∗∗ 0.93∗ −3.62 −4.34 0.96∗∗∗
(0.23) (0.54) (3.40) (3.77) (0.26)
Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

∗

Yes
129

Yes
134

0.86
(0.55)
Yes
134

−3.50 −4.24
(3.35) (3.72)
Yes
134

Yes
129

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Standard errors in parenthesis. Region-Fixed Effects include:
Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, and South America.
15

D.3

Re-evaluating Hypothesis 3 using the last three months of
2019 to measure violence against civilians

16

Table D.3: OLS regressions on the effect of recent repression on the length of stay-at-home
orders
Number of days with a stay-at-home order in the country (log)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.31∗
(0.16)

0.33∗
(0.18)

0.33∗∗
(0.17)

0.36∗
(0.19)

N of violent fatalities (log) 0.33∗∗∗ 0.36∗∗∗ 0.36∗∗∗ 0.40∗∗∗
(per one million population) (0.12) (0.14) (0.13) (0.15)
N of violent events (log)
(per one million population)
Democracy score (V-Dem)

−0.07
(0.87)

0.16
(0.86)

0.19
(1.07)

−0.07
(0.88)

0.16
(0.86)

0.19
(1.08)

State capacity

0.12
(0.27)

−0.43
(0.34)

−0.32
(0.34)

0.09
(0.26)

−0.45
(0.35)

−0.34
(0.34)

GDP per capita (log)

0.54∗∗
(0.24)

0.56∗
(0.34)

0.53∗∗
(0.25)

0.58∗
(0.34)

GDP annual growth

0.05
(0.06)

0.04
(0.06)

0.05
(0.06)

0.04
(0.06)

Population Density (’000)

−0.78
(1.20)

−0.34
(1.56)

−0.001
(0.001)

−0.0005
(0.001)

Population aged 70 or older
(percentage)

0.01
(0.08)

−0.004
(0.08)

Diabetes prevalence

−0.01
(0.06)

−0.01
(0.06)

Cardiovascular death rate

0.001
(0.002)

0.001
(0.002)

Constant

Region FE
Observations

3.09∗∗∗ 3.15∗∗∗ −2.00
(0.20) (0.49) (2.38)
Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

∗

−2.52 3.04∗∗∗ 3.09∗∗∗
(3.13) (0.22) (0.49)
Yes
129

Yes
134

Yes
134

−2.01
(2.41)

−2.57
(3.12)

Yes
134

Yes
129

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Region-Fixed Effects
include: Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, and South America.
17

E

Robustness Checks to Using All Violence Against
Civilians

18

E.1

Re-evaluating Hypothesis 1 Using All Violence Against Civilians

19

Table E.1: Cox proportional hazards models of estimating the effect of state repression on
the time to adopting a stay-at-home order

Days from 1st COVID-19 confirmed case to stay-at-home order
(1)

(2)

(3)

N of violent fatalities (log) 0.20∗∗∗ 0.17∗∗ 0.22∗∗∗
(per one million population) (0.07) (0.08) (0.08)

(4)

0.10
(0.55)

0.39
(0.58)

State Capacity

−0.16 −0.53∗∗
(0.19) (0.24)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.22∗∗∗
(0.08)
0.21∗∗∗ 0.18∗∗ 0.26∗∗∗
(0.08) (0.09) (0.10)

0.29∗∗∗
(0.10)

0.40
(0.64)

0.07
(0.55)

0.29
(0.65)

−0.39
(0.26)

−0.17 −0.54∗∗
(0.19) (0.24)

−0.40
(0.26)

N of violent events (log)
(per one million population)
Democracy score (V-Dem)

(5)

0.35
(0.59)

GDP per capita (log)

0.43∗∗
(0.17)

0.45∗∗
(0.19)

0.48∗∗∗
(0.17)

0.53∗∗∗
(0.20)

GDP Annual Growth

0.06
(0.04)

0.04
(0.05)

0.07
(0.05)

0.05
(0.05)

Population Density (’000)

−0.07
(0.46)

0.10
(0.46)

−0.11
(0.48)

0.07
(0.49)

Population aged 70
or older (percentage)

−0.03
(0.06)

−0.04
(0.06)

Diabetes prevalence

−0.02
(0.04)

−0.03
(0.04)

Cardiovascular death rate

0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)

Region FE
Observations

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

∗

Yes
129

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Standard errors in parenthesis. Region-Fixed Effects include:
Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, and South America.

20

Yes
129

E.2

Re-evaluating Hypothesis 2 Using All Violence Against Civilians

21

Table E.2: Logistic regressions on the effect of recent state repression on adopting stay-athome orders

Adoption of a stay-at-home order
(1)

(2)

(3)

N of violent fatalities (log)
0.30∗ 0.33∗ 0.39∗
(per one million population) (0.17) (0.19) (0.20)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.41∗∗
(0.21)

N of violent events (log)
(per one million population)

0.29∗ 0.30 0.33∗
(0.17) (0.19) (0.20)

0.39∗
(0.22)

0.11
0.37
(1.00) (1.06)

0.38
(1.21)

Democracy score (V-Dem)

0.15
0.42
(0.99) (1.06)

State Capacity

0.13 −0.39 −0.21
(0.34) (0.52) (0.55)

0.06 −0.42 −0.24
(0.32) (0.51) (0.54)

GDP per capita (log)

0.51
(0.34)

0.61
(0.42)

0.46
(0.33)

0.59
(0.41)

GDP Annual Growth

0.07
(0.08)

0.06
(0.08)

0.07
(0.08)

0.06
(0.08)

Population Density (’000)

−0.63 −0.19
(0.81) (0.92)

−0.61 −0.24
(0.81) (0.91)

Population aged 70
or older (percentage)

−0.01
(0.09)

−0.03
(0.09)

Diabetes prevalence

−0.04
(0.08)

−0.05
(0.08)

Cardiovascular death rate

0.002
(0.002)

0.001
(0.002)

Constant

Region FE
Observations

0.47
(1.20)

0.91∗∗∗ 0.85 −4.17 −5.24 0.80∗∗ 0.75 −3.78 −4.87
(0.26) (0.55) (3.44) (3.86) (0.32) (0.55) (3.35) (3.77)
Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

∗

Yes
129

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
129

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Standard errors in parenthesis. Region-Fixed Effects include:
Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, and South America.
22

E.3

Re-evaluating Hypothesis 3 Using All Violence Against Civilians

23

Table E.3: OLS regressions on the effect of repression on the length of stay-at-home orders

Number of days with a stay-at-home order in the country (log)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.23∗∗

0.27∗∗

0.28∗∗

0.33∗∗∗

N of violent fatalities (log)
0.21∗∗ 0.27∗∗∗ 0.30∗∗∗ 0.34∗∗∗
(per one million population) (0.09) (0.10) (0.10) (0.11)
N of violent events (log)
(per one million population) (0.11)

(0.12)

(0.11)

(0.12)

Democracy score (V-Dem)

−0.16
(0.87)

0.07
(0.86)

0.17
(1.03)

−0.18
(0.88)

0.04
(0.87)

0.13
(1.05)

State capacity

0.23
(0.28)

−0.34
(0.35)

−0.23
(0.34)

0.17
(0.27)

−0.39
(0.35)

−0.26
(0.35)

GDP per capita (log)

0.59∗∗
(0.24)

0.65∗
(0.33)

0.56∗∗
(0.24)

0.65∗
(0.33)

GDP Annual Growth

0.05
(0.06)

0.04
(0.06)

0.05
(0.06)

0.05
(0.06)

Population Density (’000)

−0.70
(1.25)

−0.34
(1.57)

−0.71
(1.19)

−0.41
(1.49)

Population aged 70 or older
(percentage)

0.003
(0.08)

−0.02
(0.08)

Diabetes prevalence

−0.02
(0.06)

−0.02
(0.06)

Cardiovascular death rate

0.002
(0.002)

0.001
(0.002)

Constant

Region FE
Observations

2.99∗∗∗ 3.08∗∗∗ −2.54
(0.22) (0.48) (2.35)
Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

∗

−3.55 2.89∗∗∗ 2.97∗∗∗
(3.08) (0.27) (0.49)
Yes
129

Yes
134

Yes
134

−2.38
(2.36)

−3.37
(3.09)

Yes
134

Yes
129

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Region-Fixed Effects
include: Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, and South America.

24

F

Robustness Checks to Using Violence Against Civilians that is Known to Come from the State Only

25

F.1

Re-evaluating Hypothesis 1 Using Only Known State-led Repression

26

Table F.1: Cox proportional hazards models of estimating the effect of state repression on
the time to adopting a stay-at-home order

Days from 1st COVID-19 confirmed case to stay-at-home order
(1)

(2)

(3)

N of violent fatalities (log) 0.21∗∗∗ 0.18∗∗ 0.23∗∗∗
(per one million population) (0.07) (0.08) (0.08)

(4)

0.10
(0.55)

0.39
(0.58)

State Capacity

−0.17 −0.54∗∗
(0.19) (0.24)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.23∗∗∗
(0.09)
0.22∗∗∗ 0.18∗ 0.27∗∗∗
(0.09) (0.09) (0.10)

0.31∗∗∗
(0.11)

0.38
(0.64)

0.07
(0.55)

0.28
(0.65)

−0.42
(0.26)

−0.18 −0.56∗∗
(0.19) (0.24)

−0.42
(0.26)

N of violent events (log)
(per one million population)
Democracy score (V-Dem)

(5)

0.35
(0.59)

GDP per capita (log)

0.43∗∗
(0.17)

0.44∗∗
(0.19)

0.46∗∗∗
(0.17)

0.52∗∗∗
(0.20)

GDP Annual Growth

0.06
(0.04)

0.04
(0.05)

0.07
(0.05)

0.05
(0.05)

Population Density (’000)

−0.07
(0.46)

0.08
(0.46)

−0.11
(0.48)

0.06
(0.49)

Population aged 70
or older (percentage)

−0.03
(0.06)

−0.03
(0.06)

Diabetes prevalence

−0.02
(0.04)

−0.03
(0.04)

Cardiovascular death rate

0.0005
(0.001)

0.0005
(0.001)

Region FE
Observations

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

∗

Yes
129

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Standard errors in parenthesis. Region-Fixed Effects include:
Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, and South America.

27

Yes
129

F.2

Re-evaluating Hypothesis 2 Using Only Known State-led Repression

28

Table F.2: Logistic regressions on the effect of recent state repression on adopting stay-athome orders

Adoption of a stay-at-home order
(1)

(2)

(3)

N of violent fatalities (log)
0.34∗ 0.37∗ 0.42∗
(per one million population) (0.19) (0.21) (0.22)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.43∗
(0.24)

N of violent events (log)
(per one million population)

0.44
0.44
0.49
(0.28) (0.30) (0.32)

0.53
(0.34)

0.08
0.33
(1.01) (1.06)

0.32
(1.21)

Democracy score (V-Dem)

0.09
0.34
(1.00) (1.06)

State Capacity

0.12 −0.38 −0.21
(0.33) (0.52) (0.55)

0.04 −0.43 −0.25
(0.32) (0.51) (0.54)

GDP per capita (log)

0.48
(0.33)

0.57
(0.41)

0.44
(0.33)

0.57
(0.41)

GDP Annual Growth

0.08
(0.08)

0.06
(0.08)

0.07
(0.08)

0.06
(0.08)

Population Density (’000)

−0.61 −0.20
(0.81) (0.92)

−0.58 −0.23
(0.81) (0.91)

Population aged 70
or older (percentage)

−0.005
(0.09)

−0.03
(0.09)

Diabetes prevalence

−0.04
(0.08)

−0.05
(0.08)

Cardiovascular death rate

0.002
(0.002)

0.001
(0.002)

Constant

Region FE
Observations

0.36
(1.21)

0.92∗∗∗ 0.89 −3.82 −4.71 0.82∗∗∗ 0.78 −3.57 −4.59
(0.26) (0.55) (3.40) (3.78) (0.32) (0.55) (3.34) (3.74)
Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

∗

Yes
129

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
129

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Standard errors in parenthesis. Region-Fixed Effects include:
Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, and South America.
29

F.3

Re-evaluating Hypothesis 3 Using Only Known State-led Repression

30

Table F.3: OLS regressions on the effect of repression on the length of stay-at-home orders

Number of days with a stay-at-home order in the country (log)
(1)
N of violent fatalities (log)
0.22∗∗
(per one million population) (0.10)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.23∗∗
(0.12)

0.26∗∗
(0.13)

0.26∗∗
(0.12)

0.30∗∗
(0.13)

0.27∗∗ 0.28∗∗∗ 0.31∗∗∗
(0.11) (0.10) (0.11)

N of violent events (log)
(per one million population)
Democracy score (V-Dem)

−0.18
(0.89)

0.04
(0.87)

0.13
(1.05)

−0.19
(0.91)

0.04
(0.89)

0.12
(1.08)

State capacity

0.19
(0.27)

−0.37
(0.35)

−0.27
(0.34)

0.14
(0.27)

−0.41
(0.35)

−0.29
(0.34)

GDP per capita (log)

0.56∗∗
(0.24)

0.60∗
(0.34)

0.54∗∗
(0.24)

0.61∗
(0.34)

GDP Annual Growth

0.05
(0.06)

0.04
(0.06)

0.05
(0.06)

0.04
(0.06)

Population Density (’000)

−0.68
(1.27)

−0.37
(1.58)

−0.67
(1.22)

−0.39
(1.53)

Population aged 70 or older
(percentage)

0.004
(0.08)

−0.02
(0.08)

Diabetes prevalence

−0.01
(0.06)

−0.02
(0.06)

Cardiovascular death rate

0.001
(0.002)

0.001
(0.002)

Constant

Region FE
Observations

3.02∗∗∗ 3.13∗∗∗ −2.21
(0.22) (0.49) (2.37)
Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

∗

−2.98 2.92∗∗∗ 3.02∗∗∗
(3.11) (0.27) (0.49)
Yes
129

Yes
134

Yes
134

−2.15
(2.37)

−2.96
(3.11)

Yes
134

Yes
129

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Region-Fixed Effects
include: Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, and South America.

31

G

Robustness Checks to Using a More Comprehensive
Country Sample

To the ACLED country sample, we follow the steps described in the section “Robustness
Checks” section in the main manuscript and add the following list of countries in our sample
with data from violence against civilians set to 0:
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Malta, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Timor-Leste,
United Kingdom, and United States.
We now proceed to evaluate the robustness of our three main hypotheses to the
inclusion of these countries:
• For a re-evaluation of Hypothesis 1, see Appendix G.1.
• For a re-evaluation of Hypothesis 2, see Appendix G.2.
• For a re-evaluation of Hypothesis 3, see Appendix G.3.

32

G.1

Re-evaluating Hypothesis 1 with an expanded country sample

Table G.1: Cox proportional hazards models of estimating the effect of state repression on
the time to adopting a stay-at-home order (expanded sample)

Days from 1st COVID-19 confirmed case to stay-at-home order
(1)

(2)

N of violent fatalities (log) 0.24∗∗∗ 0.17∗∗
(per one million population) (0.07) (0.08)

(3)

(4)

0.24∗∗∗
(0.08)

0.23∗∗∗
(0.09)

N of violent events (log)
(per one million population)
Democracy score (V-Dem)

−0.17
(0.52)

State Capacity

−0.30∗ −0.70∗∗∗ −0.67∗∗∗
(0.16)
(0.21)
(0.23)

0.09
(0.54)

(5)

(7)

(8)

0.27∗∗∗ 0.19∗∗
(0.08) (0.09)

0.30∗∗∗
(0.10)

0.33∗∗∗
(0.11)

−0.13
(0.52)

0.18
(0.54)

−0.04
(0.60)

−0.01
(0.59)

(6)

−0.28 −0.67∗∗∗ −0.64∗∗∗
(0.17) (0.21)
(0.23)

GDP per capita (log)

0.51∗∗∗
(0.17)

0.49∗∗∗
(0.19)

0.55∗∗∗
(0.17)

0.58∗∗∗
(0.19)

GDP Annual Growth

0.09∗
(0.04)

0.08∗
(0.05)

0.09∗∗
(0.04)

0.09∗
(0.05)

Population Density (’000)

−0.11
(0.41)

−0.07
(0.43)

−0.16
(0.43)

−0.11
(0.45)

Population aged 70
or older (percentage)

0.01
(0.05)

0.003
(0.05)

Diabetes prevalence

0.002
(0.04)

−0.01
(0.04)

Cardiovascular death rate

0.0001
(0.001)

−0.0001
(0.001)

Region FE
Observations

Yes
163

Yes
163

Yes
163

∗

Yes
158

Yes
163

Yes
163

Yes
163

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Standard errors in parenthesis. Region-Fixed Effects include:
Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, South America, and Oceania.

33

Yes
158

G.2

Re-evaluating Hypothesis 2 with an expanded country sample

34

Table G.2: Logistic regressions on the effect of recent state repression on adopting stay-athome orders (expanded sample)

Adoption of a stay-at-home order
(1)

(2)

(3)

N of violent fatalities (log)
0.43∗∗ 0.35∗ 0.42∗
(per one million population) (0.19) (0.20) (0.22)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.38∗
(0.23)

N of violent events (log)
(per one million population)

0.42∗∗ 0.33∗ 0.38∗
(0.17) (0.19) (0.20)

0.40∗
(0.23)

Democracy score (V-Dem)

−0.23 0.02
(0.91) (0.97)

−0.30
(1.13)

−0.20 0.07
(0.91) (0.96)

−0.35
(1.15)

State Capacity

−0.16 −0.77∗
(0.27) (0.43)

−0.79∗
(0.48)

−0.16 −0.73∗
(0.27) (0.43)

−0.76
(0.47)

GDP per capita (log)

0.63∗∗
(0.32)

0.52
(0.38)

0.58∗
(0.31)

0.55
(0.38)

GDP Annual Growth

0.10
(0.07)

0.10
(0.08)

0.09
(0.07)

0.11
(0.08)

Population Density (’000)

−0.69
(0.69)

−0.72
(0.76)

−0.68
(0.69)

−0.70
(0.76)

Population aged 70
or older (percentage)

0.04
(0.07)

0.03
(0.07)

Diabetes prevalence

0.03
(0.07)

0.01
(0.08)

−0.0005
(0.002)

−0.001
(0.002)

Cardiovascular death rate

Constant

Region FE
Observations

0.70∗∗∗ 0.89∗ −5.23
(0.21) (0.52) (3.19)
Yes
163

Yes
163

Yes
163

∗

−4.36
(3.51)
Yes
158

0.57∗∗ 0.77 −4.95
(0.24) (0.54) (3.14)
Yes
163

Yes
163

−4.48
(3.51)

Yes
163

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Standard errors in parenthesis. Region-Fixed Effects include:
Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, South America, and Oceania.
35

Yes
158

G.3

Re-evaluating Hypothesis 3 with an expanded country sample

36

Table G.3: OLS regressions on the effect of repression on the length of stay-at-home orders
(expanded sample)

Number of days with a stay-at-home order in the country (log)
(1)

(2)

N of violent fatalities (log) 0.31∗∗∗ 0.26∗∗
(per one million population) (0.09) (0.11)

(3)

(4)

0.29∗∗∗
(0.10)

0.28∗∗
(0.11)

N of violent events (log)
(per one million population)
−0.27
(0.86)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.34∗∗∗ 0.30∗∗
(0.10) (0.12)

0.32∗∗∗
(0.11)

0.33∗∗∗
(0.12)

−0.26
(0.86)

−0.33
(1.05)

Democracy score (V-Dem)

−0.49
(0.86)

−0.26
(1.04)

−0.48
(0.86)

State capacity

−0.08 −0.70∗∗ −0.66∗
(0.25) (0.33) (0.33)

−0.06
(0.25)

−0.67∗∗ −0.62∗
(0.34)
(0.34)

GDP per capita (log)

0.64∗∗∗
(0.24)

0.57∗
(0.31)

0.62∗∗∗
(0.24)

0.60∗∗
(0.30)

GDP Annual Growth

0.07
(0.06)

0.07
(0.06)

0.07
(0.06)

0.07
(0.06)

Population Density (’000)

−0.67
(0.91)

−0.67
(1.04)

−0.68
(0.87)

−0.66
(0.99)

Population aged 70 or older
(percentage)

0.01
(0.07)

−0.002
(0.06)

Diabetes prevalence

0.04
(0.06)

0.02
(0.06)

Cardiovascular death rate

0.0002
(0.002)

0.0000
(0.002)

Constant

Region FE
Observations

2.77∗∗∗ 3.06∗∗∗
(0.19) (0.48)
Yes
134

Yes
134

−3.12
(2.35)
Yes
134

∗

−2.81 2.63∗∗∗ 2.93∗∗∗
(2.86) (0.22) (0.48)
Yes
129

Yes
134

Yes
134

−3.08
(2.33)

−2.99
(2.83)

Yes
134

Yes
129

p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Region-Fixed Effects
include: Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, and South America.
37

