COVID-19 AND S OCIAL D ISTANCING M EASURES IN Q UEENSLAND
AUSTRALIA A RE A SSOCIATED WITH S HORT-T ERM D ECREASES IN
R ECORDED V IOLENT C RIME
A P REPRINT
Jason L. Payne∗
Centre for Social Research and Methods
Australian National University

Anthony Morgan
Australian Institute of Criminology

Alex R. Piquero
University of Texas at Dallas

May 2020

A BSTRACT
Since first diagnosed in late 2019, there have been more than 4 million confirmed cases of COVID-19 and
more than a quarter of a million deaths worldwide. Not since the Spanish Flu in 1918 has the world experienced such a widespread pandemic and this has motivated many countries across globe to take a series
of unprecedented actions in an effort to curb the spread and impact of the virus through the adoption of
unprecedented domestic and international travel restrictions as well as stay-at-home and social distancing
regulations. Whether these policies have altered criminal activity is an important question. In this study, we
examine officially recorded violent crime rates for the month of March and April, 2020, as reported for the
state of Queensland, Australia. We use ARIMA modeling techniques to compute six-month-ahead forecasts
of common assault, serious assault, sexual offense and domestic violence order breach rates and then compare
these forecasts (and their 95% confidence intervals) with the observed data for March and April 2020. We
conclude that by the end of April, rates of common, serious and sexual assault had declined to their lowest
level in a number of years, and for serious assault and sexual assault the decline was beyond statistical expectations. The rate at which domestic violence orders were breached in Queensland has remained unchanged
throughout the first two months of the pandemic.
Keywords: COVID-19, violence, Queensland, social distancing, ARIMA

1

Introduction

The World Health Organization (WHO) declared the novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak, caused by severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), to be a public health emergency of international concern on 30 January 2020 (World Health Organization, 2020). Since this time, countries around the world have been affected in unprecedented
ways. The number of infections has risen quickly, as has the number of deaths attributed to the virus. Following the first
diagnosed case in late 2019, there have been more than 4 million confirmed cases of COVID-19 and more than a quarter of
a million deaths worldwide. An important focus has been on the capacity of the health system in each country to respond to
the pandemic. The early experience of China, followed by countries such as Italy, Iran and more recently the United Kingdom and United States, where health systems have quickly become overwhelmed and struggled to cope with the demand from
large numbers of infected patients, has motivated countries to take drastic action and implement a wide range of proactive and
reactive measures to limit the spread of COVID-19.
Collectively referred to as ’containment measures’, these strategies are designed to limit community transmission between
individuals. There is, unsurprisingly, a great deal of variation in the ways in which different countries have approached the pandemic, and the types of containment measures they have employed. Despite these differences, each jurisdiction’s response has
involved some combination of travel restrictions and border controls, quarantine requirements, social isolation and distancing
∗

Corresponding author: jason.payne@anu.edu.au

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

requirements, and the large-scale closure of various services, business and educational facilities. While the primary concern of
government has been to minimize the health impacts of COVID-19, attention has also turned to the other effects of the pandemic. Significant societal and economic impacts have raised questions about potential increases in organized crime (Global
Initiative Against Transnational Organized Crime 2020), cybercrime (Europol, 2020) and violent crime (Eisner and Nivette,
2020), particularly domestic violence (Fitz-Gibbon and Meyer, 2020; van Gelder et al., 2020). Conversely, reductions in opportunistic, property crimes have been anticipated (Farrell and Tilley, 2020). The impact of COVID-19 on law enforcement
(Lum et al., 2020), courts (Rossner and Tait, 2020) and correctional systems (Kinner et al., 2020) have also been the subject
of speculation and analysis. Here the focus has been primarily on the emerging health risks and the impact of containment
measures on how these agencies and systems operate.
Particular attention has focused on the need for empirical research into the impact of COVID-19 and associated containment
measures on violent crime (Eisner and Nivette, 2020; Peterman et al., 2020). Changes in the routine activities of individuals,
limited social interaction, the potential strain on relationships, fear and anxiety resulting from isolation, and the financial stress
of job losses and reduced incomes, each have the potential to influence violent crime in different ways. Understanding these
impacts is important to inform how to respond, particularly as the pandemic and containment measures are likely to persist for
some time yet.
In this study, we use officially recorded police data from Queensland, Australia, to look for early signs that violent crime has
changed in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. In an international context, Australia is a unique site of analysis because the
rapid introduction of strong social distancing regulations has coincided with the transition to winter–a time when seasonal crime
rates are expected to fall. Without accounting for these seasonal effects, there is a risk that any observed short-term decline in
crime may be overstated or incorrectly attributed as a consequence of COVID-19. In this study, we examine officially recorded
violent crime rates for the month of March and April 2020. We conduct this analysis in Queensland because it was the first
state or territory in Australia to declare a public health emergency on January 29, 2020. It is also the first jurisdiction to provide
open access to up-to-date data.
1.1

What restrictions have been introduced in Australia?

Compared with other countries, the infection rate in Australia has remained relatively low. The first Australian case was
recorded in January, however, the number of new cases increased rapidly during March (Figure 1). There have been more
than 7,000 confirmed cases recorded in Australia (as of May 12) and more than 100 people have died as a result of the disease
(Australian Government Department of Health, 2020). Most confirmed cases acquired their infection during overseas travel, or
via contact with someone who had travelled overseas, and on-board cruise ships (Australian Government Department of Health,
2020).
[Figure 1 about here.]
Importantly, as a federated nation, responsibility for implementing containment measures is shared between the Federal and
state and territory governments, while states and territories are able to choose how to enforce them. Although there has been
a strong emphasis on a consistent national approach, there has also been variation in some of the measures employed in each
jurisdiction. This has included strategies such as border controls and school closures.
Containment measures have been introduced incrementally. In terms of a national response, the entry of foreign nationals from
mainland China was banned on February 1, before incremental travel bans on Iran, South Korea and Italy in early March. This
was followed by self-isolation requirements on all travelers arriving in Australia introduced on March 16. Large, non-essential,
organized public gatherings of more than 500 people were also restricted from this date, as were indoor gatherings of more than
100 people. At the same time, social distancing requirements were introduced, which required individuals to maintain a distance
of 1.5 metres (almost five feet) from one another. The Biosecurity (Human Biosecurity Emergency) (Human Coronavirus with
Pandemic Potential) Declaration 2020 was announced on March 18, followed by a further announcement that Australian
borders were closed to all non-Australian citizens and non-residents effective March 20. The following day, the requirement
that there be 4 square metres per person in any enclosed space was introduced. On the 22nd of March the Prime Minister
announced large-scale closures of take-away liquor outlets, licensed premises, restaurants and cafes (except for takeaway food),
entertainment venues and places of worship, which took effect the following day. Further restrictions were imposed on a range
of other venues, including indoor and outdoor markets, on March 26, while limits were placed on the number of people who
are allowed to attend weddings and funerals. Public gatherings were limited to two people (non-family members) from March
30, and Australians were advised that they were only allowed to leave home for essential shopping, medical needs, exercise, or
for work or education.
Queensland became the first Australian state or territory to declare a public health emergency under the Public Health Act 2005
on January 29, 2020. Since the non-essential business, activity and undertaking closure direction was first released on March 23,
a series of revisions have been made in line with national requirements, imposing further limits on which venues and businesses
2

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

may continue to operate. School closures came into effect on March 30, remaining open to the children of essential service
workers. Queensland borders were closed effective March 26, with entry limited to Queensland residents, residents of border
communities undertaking essential activities and other exempt persons. Non-residents were initially required to self-isolate for
14 days after crossing the border; however, as of early April, restrictions were tightened further and only Queensland residents
could cross the border. These restrictions are enforceable by law.
1.2

Why is violent crime likely to be impacted by COVID-19?

Broadly speaking, there are several mechanisms through which the COVID-19 containment measures are likely to influence
violence. We limit our discussion here to the most likely short-term situational effects that are best explained by Routine
Activities Theory (Cohen and Felson, 1979), and the short-to-longer-term financial and emotional pressure (General Strain
Theory, Agnew, 1992) that might spur a range of negative emotions which, in turn, manifest as violence as the pandemic
progresses.
1.2.1

Routine Activities

The first, and most obvious of these mechanisms, is the impact on the routine activities of individuals. Routine activities play
an important role in understanding when and where crime is more likely to occur. According to Cohen and Felson (1979),
crime occurs when there is a convergence of three critical elements—a motivated offender, a suitable target and the absence
of a capable guardian. Crime is more common in places where these three things converge on a regular basis. Crime pattern
theory combines aspects of the routine activity approach and other environmental criminological theories, and focuses on how
offenders may come across opportunities for crime in the course of their everyday lives (Brantingham and Brantingham, 1993).
Brantingham and Brantingham (1995) describe crime as occurring when the activity spaces of offenders—which concentrate
around the places they visit most frequently—intersect with the activity spaces of a target, precipitated by some triggering
event. Obviously, major disruptions of these routine activities may have a significant impact on when, and where, we might
expect crime to occur. Containment measures are likely to mean that much less time is spent interacting with other people in
public settings, and much more time spent at home.
When asked, adult Australians have reported a high degree of compliance with recommended social distancing practices, including keeping distance between people, avoiding public spaces and avoiding large gatherings (Australian Bureau of Statistics,
2020c). Google’s (Google, 2020) mobility data highlights how much peoples’ movement and time spent in public and private
spaces has changed as a result of the containment measures. Location data reported by Google on community mobility has
tracked how often and for how long people travel to different location types, compared with a baseline value (the median value
for the same day of the week in January and early February). Figure 2 shows these changes over time, and demonstrates that
there have been significant reductions in visits to public spaces, including parks (down 43% as of April 30), retail and recreation
premises (down 39%), workplaces (down 34%) and transit stations (down 60%). Not surprisingly, the time spent in residential
locations has increased by 18 percent, which may help to increase the opportunity for inter-personal violence. These changes
took effect in late March, and were sustained for most of the month of April as it was not until the beginning of May that these
restrictions started to be loosened (Australian Broadcasting Corporation, 2020a).
[Figure 2 about here.]
Figure 3 describes the trend as of the end of April for Australia, overall, and for Queensland and shows that the trends observed
nationally were not as pronounced in Queensland. Nevertheless, similar trends in mobility were observed in Queensland in
the second half of March, and these changes were sustained until the end of April. That significant changes in mobility were
observed in March, seemingly in advance of the introduction of major restrictions, indicates that people changed their behavior
in response to the perceived threat from the pandemic before measures were formally implemented. This is not unique to
Australian residents; similar patterns have been observed elsewhere as evidenced by Google’s mobility data in Europe for
example, where residents—informed by the risk of infection—engaged in social distancing before the measures announced by
government were implemented (Midoes, 2020). In large part this was also due to many business implementing work-from-home
policies and only limiting on-premise work to essential employees.
[Figure 3 about here.]
Limiting the amount of time that people are permitted to spend outside of the home, and the number of people outside the
home with whom people may have contact, reduces opportunities for interactions between potential victims and offenders.
Spending significantly less time socializing in recreational areas, such as in entertainment precincts, may lead to less public
forms of violence. A sizeable proportion of assaults—between 37 and 70 percent, depending on which state or territory—occur
in public locations (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2019). We know, for example, that a significant proportion of violent
crime in Australia is attributable to the night time economy and peak on weekends during periods of high alcohol consumption,
3

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

particularly in major urban centers (Miller et al., 2016). Excessive consumption of alcohol, common in these settings, is directly
related to physical aggression, and is a contributing factor in physical and sexual violence (Graham et al., 1998). Rates of selfreported involvement in physical aggression in and around licensed premises in the previous three months among thousands of
patrons surveyed in nine different cities ranged from seven to 17 percent (Miller et al., 2016). Entertainment precincts are also
a known hotspot for sexual violence.
Conversely, the increase in time spent at home increases the risk of violence in residential locations. According to the latest
ABS (2019) data, between 30 and 63 percent of assaults and between 40 and 73 percent of sexual assaults normally occur
in residential settings (with most jurisdictions closer to the upper end of that range). This might be expected to increase
during COVID-19. There is particular concern about the increased risk of family and domestic violence, which is already a
significant problem in Australia (Fitz-Gibbon and Meyer, 2020; Usher et al., n.d.). The most obvious risk is from intimate
partner violence, which accounts for more than half of all family violence-related assaults (Australian Bureau of Statistics,
2019). Former partners may pose less of a threat (at least in terms of physical violence) in periods of social isolation; however,
around four in five assaults by an intimate partner are committed by the victim’s current partner (Australian Bureau of Statistics,
2019). Adolescent family violence is also an area of concern and, with the closure of schools and many recreational facilities,
may increase due to increased contact between young people who use violence and their parents. As well as being at a greater
risk of violence in the home due to increased contact with their abuser, victims of family and domestic violence face increasing
social isolation, have limited opportunities to seek help from family and friends, may be unable or fearful of seeking help due
to surveillance by their partner, or face challenges with seeking assistance from formal support services due to social distancing
measures preventing face to face contact (Peterman et al., 2020; Usher et al., n.d.; van Gelder et al., 2020). This raises the
potential risk of repeat violence.
Of course, not everyone will comply with social distancing measures. Unsurprisingly, there is some overlap between the profile
of those people who are less likely to comply and those people who are more likely to be involved in crime. Specifically, Nivette
et al., (2020) found that non-compliance was associated with antisocial potential, including delinquent behavior. It is plausible
that these non-compliant individuals will be more likely to offend, reducing any effect from the changes to routine activities of
compliant individuals.
1.2.2

General Strain

The other potential consequence of the Queensland lockdowns is an increase in criminal—especially violent—behavior–that
might occur as a result of the emotional and financial pressure of the pandemic. In Australia, there are already signs of the strain
on Australian households. One in three Australian households already report being financially worse off (Australian Bureau
of Statistics, 2020a). Levels of anxiety are also much higher than usually observed (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2020b).
The Australian Bureau of Statistics (2020a) reported that 72 percent of businesses have experienced a reduced cash-flow that
is expected to harm business activity and employment over the coming months. In fact, throughout March, these challenging
economic circumstances have resulted in a 7.5 percent decrease in employee jobs and an 8.2 percent reduction in wages paid
to employees (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2020c). Unsurprisingly some employees and sectors have been harder hit than
others, with a 33 percent reduction in employee jobs for the accommodation and food services sector and a 27 percent in the arts
and entertainment sectors. The implication of this financial stress is not insubstantial; violence, including domestic violence, is
concentrated in areas with higher socio-economic disadvantage (Hulme et al., 2019), while financial stress has been identified
as a risk factor for repeat offending (Dowling and Morgan, 2016).
The restrictions on movement are likely to be compounded by the negative psychological impacts of quarantine measures. A
recent rapid review by Brooks et al. (2020) concluded that there are likely to be wide ranging and long lasting psychological
impacts, including a high prevalence of stress disorders, irritability, emotional disturbance, anger and depression, among other
symptoms. Data from call centers in the United States for example, reveals substantial increases in calls to mental health
and suicide prevention hotlines (Goodman, 2020; Jackson, 2020). Although this may not, in and of itself, lead to increased
violence, people who experience these symptoms may be more likely to engage in substance misuse (Clay and Parker 2020)
which, together with poor mental health, is associated with an increased risk of violence (Elbogen and Johnson, 2009). Also,
there is evidence of increased alcohol consumption in the home due to on-premise restrictions and increased home delivery
(Foundation for Alcohol Research {and} Education, 2020). While debate persists regarding the causal role of substance use
and domestic violence (Graham et al., 2010), these are situational stressors that can further exacerbate the risk of family and
domestic violence.
One criminological theory that is apt to help explain a potential increase in violence, in particular violence in the home, is
Agnew’s (1992) General Strain Theory. Recognizing that the early macro-level strain perspectives failed to take into account
the social psychological processes involved when perceiving strain, Agnew reframed the theory at the micro-level. Specifically,
Agnew posited the existence of three broad categories of strain: (1) failure to achieve positive goals; (2) presentation of noxious
stimuli, and (3) removal of positive stimuli. Within the context of COVID-19, it is relatively easy to identify examples of each
of these types of strain. For example, being furloughed from work is a good example of the first type of strain as people may
4

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

not be able to pay their rent or mortgage. An example of the second type of strain, is the built-up tension that may exist because
individuals find themselves in cramped quarters with little room for escape. And finally, with respect to the removal of positive
stimuli, lockdowns prevent individuals from visiting restaurants, bars, shopping centers, and gyms—all of which are activities
people may enjoy and for which may also offer stress relief.
For Agnew however, there is more to understanding criminal behavior than just the presence of these types of strain. Most
importantly, he contends that these types of strains produce a wide range of negative behaviors within persons including anger,
rage, fear, depression, anxiety, and so forth. It is the experience of these negative emotions that, left unchecked by coping
mechanisms, are expected to lead to a higher likelihood of criminal behavior - but especially violence.
During the period of enforced social distancing associated with COVID-19, it is easy to envision that Agnew would predict
an increase in interpersonal, domestic partner-oriented violence because of the anger and rage that may occur because people
do not have much physical separation and because the victim may not be able to reach out for help because their aggressor
lives with them. With respect to child abuse, there may be reasons to think there would be both an increase and a decrease in
crime. The former, for similar reasons as to partner abuse, but a reduction in child abuse could be anticipated as teachers are
the ones who are most often able to ‘see’ the after-effects of physical child abuse but with schools shuttered that is less likely
to happen. And with respect to property crime, it is expected, within the theory, that many forms of burglaries and thefts would
drop because people are home and not out and about, but cybercrime and other fishing-related scams could increase as people
use the internet more often.
1.3

What trends have been observed around the world?

Scholars have been quick to examine the impact of COVID-19 on violent crime, particularly in large US cities with open
source crime data. Mohler et al., (2020) analyzed daily counts of calls for service and recorded crime in Los Angeles and
Indianapolis for several major offense categories. They compared the period after stay at home orders had been issued (March
20 and March 24, respectively)—regarded as the time period when full social distancing came into effect—to the period prior
to school closures. They observed no change in assault/battery calls for service in either city; however, there was a significant
increase in domestic violence calls for service of between 13.6 and 15.2 events per day. Domestic violence assaults could not
be distinguished from other assaults in recorded crime data. Recorded aggravated assaults (of which domestic violence will
account for some) did not change. Mohler et al., (2020) also observed significant declines in burglary and robbery calls for
service in Los Angeles, and a small increase in vehicle theft, but no change in Indianapolis. In terms of recorded crime, only
robbery in Los Angeles was significantly reduced. These findings were reinforced in a second regression that incorporated
Google mobility data. Yet, their results are limited because of the short-term analysis and inability to disentangle seasonal
trends and more longer-term (yearly) crime patterns.
Campedelli et al. (2020) analyzed daily recorded crime counts over a three year period in Los Angeles using Bayesian structural time-series models, incorporating controls for weather (seasonality) and holiday periods. This approach allowed them to
produce a synthetic counterfactual—what would have occurred had there been no containment measures—which they compared with observed crime counts during a period of increasingly stringent social distancing measures in March. They found
no impact on homicide, assault with deadly weapons, intimate partner assault, but observed a decrease in robberies and battery
(simple assault)–the latter only during the period with more stringent social distancing measures. Property crimes, including
shoplifting and thefts, decreased, as did crime overall.
Most recently, Ashby (2020) analyzed data for 16 large US cities. Similar to Campedelli (2020), Ashby forecasted the expected
frequency of crime during the pandemic based on data from 2016 to early 2020, but used seasonal auto-regressive integrated
moving average models to produce the synthetic counterfactual for the period after January 21 (the first confirmed case of
COVID-19 in the US). There was no change in crime levels between the observed and predicted values before early March,
when social distancing measures (like closing schools and then stay at home orders) were introduced. In terms of violent crime,
there was no impact in any of the cities on serious assaults in public places or in residences. The latter was used as a proxy
for domestic violence. There was some evidence of an impact on property crime, including burglary and theft from vehicles;
however, Ashby observed significant variation between the cities, with no two cities exhibiting the same trends in crime.
In Sweden, where containment measures have been less stringent than elsewhere, Gerell et al. (2020) compared the weekly
crime numbers in 2020 with the median from three previous years. There were differences between the observed and expected
values for indoor and outdoor assault; however, these differences were relatively small and, in the case of outdoor assault,
not consistent for all of the weeks examined. Gerell et al. (2020) also observed declines in residential burglary, commercial
burglary, and pickpocketing.
Overall, there is mixed support for the suggestion that COVID-19 and associated containment measures has had an impact
violent crime and, in the more robust studies using longer-term time series analysis, there was no evidence of an impact on
domestic violence (Ashby, 2020; Campedelli et al., 2020). Importantly, each of these studies has focused on the initial weeks
following the introduction of containment measures, meaning that it might still be too early to have detected any meaningful
5

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

impact on crime. The impact on simple assault in Los Angeles only emerged in the most recent iteration of the analysis
(Campedelli et al., 2020), when social distancing measures had become more stringent. The limitations of using police recorded
crime data to measure certain crime types when reporting rates might also be affected, particularly for domestic violence, were
also acknowledged.
1.4

How has COVID-19 impacted crime in Australia?

Most of the evidence around the impact of crime impacts of COVID-19 in Australia is based on media reports, which draw on
information supplied by police agencies. Limited detailed analyses have been conducted, although as the pandemic continues, it
is likely that more data will become available and studies will be published. Further, it is recognized that many law enforcement
agencies and other data custodians will be conducting their own in-house analyses of crime to help inform their respective
government’s response.
There is emerging evidence of the impact of restrictions on family violence and, to date, that evidence has produced something
of a mixed picture. Some police jurisdictions have seen an increase in family violence incidents, others have not. Western
Australian Police has reported a five percent increase (Shepherd, 2020), but South Australia recently reported that their numbers
have not changed (Australian Broadcasting Corporation, 2020b). Victoria Police have reported 14 percent of incidents as being
related to COVID-19 and the need for victims and perpetrators having to stay at home together (Davey, 2020). But there has
been no increase in recorded assaults. Most recently, and in the only published analyses that we are aware of, the New South
Wales (NSW) Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research concluded there had been no increase in recorded domestic violence
(Freeman, 2020). Freeman (2020) acknowledges that social isolation may have impacted the willingness or ability of victims
to report to police; however, trends in serious forms of violence, less susceptible to changes in reporting rates, were also stable.
Still, the study did not involve any time series analysis, rather, the frequency of recorded offenses in March 2020 was compared
with March 2019.
Data from other sources has provided a slightly different picture. 50 percent of domestic violence service providers in NSW
reported an increase in demand following the onset of the pandemic in February (Women’s Safety NSW, 2020). But elsewhere,
demand has not increased. In regional NSW, services have reported a decline in calls, raising concerns isolated victims cannot
reach out for help (Tate, 2020). Similarly, there have been reports of a decrease in calls to domestic violence helplines—falls by
as much as 30% to 1800 RESPECT have been reported (Talwar, 2020)—but these numbers are climbing again (Pearson, 2020).
Conversely, there has been an increase in calls to men’s helplines from perpetrators reaching out for help to stop them from
being violent (Tuohy, 2020). Finally, trauma surgeons in the Northern Territory have reported a 15 percent increase in surgeries
related to domestic violence (Davey, 2020). However, none of these data sources have been subjected to rigorous analysis.
1.5

Current study

The problem with some of the published studies conducted to date—Australian and overseas—is that they have tended to rely
on short time series. The benefit of shorter-term studies is that they have used daily offense counts and because of this they
are able to detect immediate, short-term changes in crime. However, analyzing short time periods does not account for longer
term trends and seasonal variation that might occur, leading to masked or exaggerated effects. The same is true of studies
that compare data for March 2020 with the same month in previous year (or years). Our study overcomes these limitations by
using officially-recorded violent crime rates to model the series trend over six years between February 2014 and 2020. We then
compute six-month ahead forecasts for the various crime types and compare these with the observed rates for March and April
2020, when COVID-19 social distancing regulations were in place.

2
2.1

Methodology
Data

These data are drawn from the Queensland Government’s Open Data Portal (Queensland Government, 2020). The ODP reports
state-wide monthly offense rates per 100,000 of the Queensland population. The most recent addition to these data were for
the month of April 2020–one month after the state of Queensland introduced significant social distancing regulations. For this
study, we use the offense rates for four types of violent crime – common assault, serious assault, sexual offenses and breaches
of domestic violence orders.
2.2

Analytical approach

For each of the four violent offense categories, we operationalize an Auto Regressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA)
model on the monthly offense rate between February 2014 and February 2020. ARIMA models are a specific type of time series
6

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

forecasting technique which capitalize on several key time-series parameters–the series trend and seasonality, its lagged auto
correlations and its lagged partial auto-correlations (correlations between residual errors). Put simply, past values of each time
series are used to identify predictable patterns. These patterns are then used to specify a statistical model from which forecasts
can be computed. Like all models, the relative accuracy of any forecast depends on the strength of the relationship between
past and future values.
In each series, we exclude from the analysis the observed value for March 2020 onwards since this is the month when social distancing restrictions were first introduced in Queensland. Each series also requires a unique ARIMA specification, depending on
the presence (or absence) of seasonality and the unique nature of the series trend, auto-correlation and partial auto-correlation.
Procedurally, we begin each model with a statistical assessment of the presence of a unit-root (non-stationarity). A unit-root is a
stochastic trend which represents a systematic pattern that is unpredictable. Any time-series which evidence a unit-root must be
first de-seasonalized or first-differenced before ARIMA modelling can be performed. To explore stationarity, the Augmented
Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test is used. The null-hypothesis of the ADF test is that raw series is non-stationary (i.e., includes a
unit-root). Failure to reject the null-hypothesis at p<0.05 indicates the presence of a unit-root and necessitates its removal.
Where there is some evidence of non-stationarity, the unit root is removed by seasonal and trend differencing. The raw series
is used for subsequent ARIMA modelling if the ADF test indicates stationarity. If not, the seasonality-differenced and firstdifferenced series is used, either separately or combined, depending on which produces the superior fit to the data. The base
seasonality adjustment is SARIMA(0,1,0,12), where the purpose of seasonality differencing is to paramatize the additive seasonal patterns in the raw data. Second, and where needed, non-stationarity in the trend is removed using first-differencing. The
base adjustment for non-stationarity in the trend is ARIMA(0,1,0). Therefore, a series that requires both trend and seasonality
differencing is known as ARIMA(0,1,0) SARIMA(0,1,0,12).
Subsequent to any adjustments, each offense series is then explored using Auto-Correlation (AC) and Partial Auto-Correlation
(PAC) plots. These plots help to determine the most likely specification of the seasonal and trend-level Moving Average (MA)
and Auto Regressive (AR) parameters. From here the modelling is iterative and each specification seeks to identify the unique
AR and MA specifications which best fit the observed data. As with all modelling, there is a trade-off between parsimony
and best fit, so we use the Aikake Information Criteria (AIC) and the Baysian Information Criteria (BIC) to guide final model
selection.
At the conclusion of the modelling procedure for each violent offense, we use the final ARIMA specification to forecast both
point estimates and their mean square errors (MSE). The MSE is used to calculate 95% confidence intervals up to and including
September 2020. We then compare the observed offense rate for March and April 2020 to the forecasted point estimate for the
same month. We also consider its position within the confidence interval of the forecast and we only conclude that the offense
rate has changed under COVID-19 conditions if the observed value (for March and April 2020) falls outside the upper or lower
bounds of the 95% confidence interval.

3
3.1

Results
Common assault

Between February 2014 and February 2020, the rate of common assault in Queensland has fluctuated between 9.0 and 15.5
recorded offenses per 100,000 of the population. The observed rate in March 2020 was 14.6 per 100,000, up from the previous
month (13.5 per 100,000) and slightly lower than the same time in the previous year (15.1 per 100,000). Comparative tests
(Table 1) confirm the need for both seasonality adjustment and trend-level first-differencing and inspection of the AC and PAC
plots indicate significant auto-correlations at lags 1 and 12.
The specification that best fit these data was ARIMA(0,1,1 12) SARIMA(0,1,0,12) (AIC=209.97). The modelled parameters
are provided in Table 2 and the dynamic forecasts for March and April 2020 are provided in Figure 4. We note that the observed
rate (14.6 per 100,000) of common assault for March–the month when social distancing regulations first came into effect–was
almost equal to the forecasted rate (14.7 per 100,000) for that month. In April, the common assault rate fell further to 10.9
offenses per 100,000, which was below the forecast (12.1 per 100,000) but still within the 95% confidence interval of the
prediction for that month. We conclude, therefore, that there is insufficient evidence to suggest that common assault rates have
been negatively impacted during the first two months of COVID-19.
As a post-script, we think it is important here to acknowledge that the rate of common assault in Queensland in April 2020
was the lowest it has been in more than three years. Not since July 2016 has the recorded rate of common assault fallen below
11 offenses per 100,000. This is a striking and notable result, even though the statistical evidence suggests that this could
have occurred irrespective of COVID-19. Importantly, this result exemplifies the challenge and uniqueness of conducting this
analysis in the southern hemisphere where the crimes rates are expected to fall naturally during the colder months.
7

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

[Figure 4 about here.]
3.2

Serious assault

Since February 2014 the rate of serious assault in Queensland has fluctuated between 12.2 and 21.3 offenses per 100,000 of the
population. In March 2020 the observed rate was 18.9 per 100,000. This was lower than the previous month (19.5 per 100,000)
and lower than at the same time in the previous year (19.4 per 100,000). Comparative model tests (Table 3) indicate the need
for both trend and seasonality differencing, which AC and PAC plots indicate the need for seasonal AR and trend-level MA
parameters.
The best fitting model was specified as ARIMA(1,1,0) SARIMA(0,1,1,12) (AIC=209.51) and the final modelled parameters are
provided in Table 4. Overall the model captures both the series trend and its seasonal peaks and troughs; however there is still
some period-specific variability that was not easily predicted. Overall, the observed rate of serious assault in March 2020 (18.9
per 100,000) was lower than forecast from the historical series (20.2 per 100,000), but not beyond the range of statistically
plausible values for that month (18.3 - 22.1 per 100,000) (Figure 5). In April, the serious assault rate plummets (to 12.7 per
100,000) well below the series forecast and well outside the confidence interval (15.4 to 19.7 per 100,000). In fact, not since
July 2015 has the serious assault rate been as low as it was in April 2020 and the statistical evidence suggests that this decline
would not have occurred in the absence of some significant exogenous changes.
[Figure 5 about here.]
3.3

Sexual offending

Since February 2014, sexual offense rates in Queensland have ranged between 8.3 and 15.4 per 100,000 of the population. The
observed result for March 2020 was 9.2 per 100,000. This was lower than in the previous month (11.3 per 100,000) and lower
than the same time in the previous year (14.5 per 100,000). The ADF test confirmed that the series is stationary and comparative
model tests (Table 5) confirm that neither trend nor seasonality differencing was required. Inspection of the AC and PAC plots
indicate significant auto-correlation at lags 1 and 2 and so several specifications of the AR and MA parameters were compared.
The final and best fitting model–ARIMA(0,0,2)–required two MA parameters at lags 1 and 2. The model parameters are
presented in Table 6. It was apparent from the fitted data that the model performs relatively poorly and does not adequately
capture the high degree of volatility evidenced across the time series. In other words, there is significant fluctuation in the series
which has no discernible or reliably predictable pattern. As for the observed rate of sexual offending in March 2020, the rate
(9.2 per 100,000) was considerably lower than forecast by the model (11.1 per 100,000) (Figure 6) but within the boundary of
plausible outcomes (8.3 to 13.9 per 100,000) given the history of the series. In April, the sexual assault rate fell again to 8.3 per
100,000 and this observed rate fell beyond the lower limit of the confidence interval for that month. It is notable that the rate of
sexual offending in April 2020 was the lowest recorded in the six-year series.
[Figure 6 about here.]
3.4

Breaches of Domestic Violence Orders

The rate at which domestic violence orders are breached in Queensland has increased steadily between 2014 and 2020. In early
2014, the breach rate averaged at 26 per 100,000 of the population. By 2020 that had increased to a high of 62 per 100,000. The
observed DVO breach rate in March 2020 was 57.5 per 100,000 which was higher than in the previous month (55.2 per 100,000)
and higher than it was in March of the previous year (52.0 per 100,000). However, we caution here on the interpretation of
these rates since they are not adjusted for the number of actual domestic violence orders which are active nor the rate at which
they are issued by the courts. In the present data, the longer-term upward trend, including in the past 12 months, is likely a
strong reflection of the increased number of orders being made by the courts and not necessarily any trend in the relative rate
of breach events when calculated as function of the number of active orders.
Nevertheless, the ADF statistic confirmed that without adjustment the DVO breach series is non-stationary (ADF=-1.628,
p=0.47). Comparative model analysis (Table 7) indicated the need for both seasonal and trend differencing. AC and PAC plots
suggested significant auto-correlations and partial auto-correlations at lag 1.
The best fitting model–ARIMA(1,1,0) SARIMA(0,1,1,12)–required an AR parameter at lag 1 for the trend and an MA parameter at lag 1 in the seasonal pattern (AIC=337.75). The final model specifications can be found in Table 8 the modelled results
are graphically presented in Figure 7. Overall, the model fit the data with surprising precision. As for the observed breach
rate of Domestic Violence Orders in March 2020, the rate (57.5 per 100,000) was lower than forecast by the model (59.2 per
100,000) (Figure 11) but well within the range (54.9 to 63.4 per 100,000) of plausible values given the history of the series. In
April, the DVO breach rate declined slightly, although not as much as was forecast and remained within the confidence interval.
8

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

We conclude that there is insufficient evidence to suggest that breaches of domestic violence orders increased or decreased in
the context of COVID-19.
[Figure 7 about here.]

4

Discussion

The COVID-19 pandemic has had deleterious consequences on the health and well-being of individuals world-wide. One outcome of this easily contagious and deadly disease was the response that governments had with respect to travel restrictions, social distancing recommendations, and lockdown orders. And one potential outcome associated with these policies—especially
social distancing and stay-at-home edicts—is the potential for increases in crime, especially inter-personal violent offenses.
Accordingly, this study offers one of the first Australian-based analyses of the extent to which crime has changed during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Specifically, we used an iterative univariate ARIMA framework to model the six-year trend in the state-wide rates of four
violent crime types (common assault, serious assault, sexual offenses and breaches of domestic violence orders) in Queensland,
Australia. We capitalize on the period-by-period and seasonal patterns to generate dynamic forecasts (and their 95% confidence
intervals) for comparison with the observed rates for March 2020. We conclude that, while in none of the four violent crime
categories was the rate of recorded crime for March significantly different from the forecast, the rate of recorded serious assault
and sexual offending was significantly lower in April.
This delayed effect is likely a consequence of the incremental measures that were introduced, and the timing of these measures.
March 2020 was the month in which the most significant social distancing rules were first introduced in Queensland. However,
their introduction occurred in the second half of the month and Google’s mobility trend data showed there was a large but
gradual decrease in the use of public spaces, and an increase in time spent at home, towards the end of March. The impact
of these containment measures, particularly in terms of influencing routine activities, was therefore not observed until April.
This was consistent with the findings of Campedelli et al.’s (2020) study of assaults in Los Angeles, where a reduction was
not observed until the more stringent stay-at-home measures were introduced. Importantly, the effect of major job losses and
associated financial stress may not become evident until future months. The dynamic forecasts presented in this study, and
their confidence intervals, will be a useful tool in making an assessment as to whether the strain caused by COVID-19 impacts
violent crime in the longer-term.
In the absence of more detailed data it is difficult to offer definitive explanations for the different trends observed for the four
crime categories reported here. It is possible that the decline in serious assault and sexual offenses is largely a function of the
impact of containment measures on the night time economy, which have seen these major weekend attractions all but shut down.
It is well known that alcohol intoxication is associated with more serious forms of violence, and is a contributing factor in a
large number of sexual assaults. It seems unlikely that crimes associated with the night time economy—particularly less serious
common assaults—have not been affected to a larger degree by the closures. Violence in the night time economy accounts for
a significant proportion of violence overall (Miller et al., 2016). It is plausible that the lack of an observable effect in common
assault is a function of competing trends between violence occurring in different contexts. The decrease in violence associated
with the night time economy may be offset by increases in assaults in residential settings, especially domestic violence. This
can only be determined through a more detailed analysis of data on offense location, relationship between offender and victim,
alcohol and drug involvement and so on.
Yet, there are also limitations associated with relying on recorded crime data to measure changes in violence, particularly
violence in the home. While there is widespread concern about the impact of containment measures on domestic violence,
this does not necessarily mean this would translate to an increase in recorded assault. We know that a significant proportion
of violent crime goes unreported to police. Although the analysis of serious violence addresses this to some extent (serious
violence is more likely to come to the attention of police), we cannot assume that the rate of reporting has remained stable
for common assault or sexual offenses. This is particularly important in the context of domestic violence, which often goes
unreported to police (Voce and Boxall, 2018), and for sexual assault that is perpetrated by family members. Advocates and
academics have voiced concerns regarding the inability of victims to reach out for help because of isolation from family,
friends and support services, fear of the abuser with whom they reside and the challenges with seeking assistance due to
social distancing measures (Fitz-Gibbon and Meyer, 2020; Peterman et al., 2020; van Gelder et al., 2020). We have attempted
to provide some insight into this by examining the domestic violence order breach rates, but again, we are hesitant about
interpreting these data as a true measure of the extent of domestic violence. As with any procedural offense, the breach rate
may be influenced by the enforcement practices of police and/or the willingness of victims to report in these unprecedented
circumstances. The fact that domestic violence breach offenses have not declined may reflect a sustained level of reporting of
breaches by those victims who have already been in contact with police and the criminal justice system. One option worthy
of further consideration in the absence of open access to data on domestic violence-related offenses would be a more detailed
analysis of violent offense victimization rates by victim sex and, specifically, the long-term trend in the proportion of adult
9

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

assault victims who were female. Although these data themselves suffer a number of limitations, they would provide some
signal of a shift from community to home-based violence.
We believe that our effort offers an important first step in trying to understand the crime implications of the COVID-19 pandemic and associated containment measures in the Australian context. Our univariate ARIMA models provide an important
opportunity for a rapid and robust assessment. Ideally, these Queensland data will soon be complemented by equivalent analyses conducted with data from other Australian jurisdictions, once they are publicly available and offer a nice counterpoint
to the research in the United States and elsewhere in order to provide a more complete picture of the government’s policy responses to COVID-19. At present, there does not seem to be a crime-exacerbating effect of some of these policies, at least with
respect to officially-recorded crime. Only through continued data collection and analyses will this portrait begin to be filled
out. And in this regard, it will be just as important to track any changes in crime rates when these restrictions are loosened and
potentially eliminated. We also hope that researchers will engage in a qualitative data collection to ask respondents about how
they dealt with the various policy proscriptions and how they adapted to them vis-à-vis the strainful experiences that may have
ensued. Only through the combination of quantitative and qualitative data will social scientists have a complete understanding
of COVID-19.

References
Agnew, R. (1992). Foundation for a general strain theory of crime and delinquency. Criminology, 30(1), 47–88. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1745-9125.1992.tb01093.x
Ashby, M. (2020). Initial evidence on the relationship between the coronavirus pandemic and crime in the united states. https:
//doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/ep87s
Australian Broadcasting Corporation. (2020a, May 8). Coronavirus restrictions will soon be eased in queensland and wa. what
about other states? Retrieved May 8, 2020, from https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-04-26/state-by-state-breakdownof-coronavirus-restrictions/12186302
Australian Broadcasting Corporation. (2020b, April 9). SA police says no spike in domestic violence amid coronavirus restrictions, despite alleged murder [ABC news]. Retrieved April 27, 2020, from https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020- 0420/police-say-no-domestic-violence-spike-in-sa-during-coronavirus/12165598
Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2019, June 27). Recorded crime - victims, australia, 2018 (Cat no. 4510.0) [Library Catalog:
www.abs.gov.au Publisher: c=AU; o=Commonwealth of Australia; ou=Australian Bureau of Statistics]. Australian Bureau of Statistics. Library Catalog: www.abs.gov.au Publisher: c=AU; o=Commonwealth of Australia; ou=Australian
Bureau of Statistics. Canberra. Retrieved April 28, 2020, from https : / / www. abs . gov. au / AUSSTATS / abs @ .nsf /
DetailsPage/4510.02018?OpenDocument
Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2020a, May 4). Business indicators, business impacts of COVID-19, april 2020 (Cat. no.
5676.0.55.003). Australian Bureau of Statistics. Retrieved May 7, 2020, from https://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs%
40.nsf/mediareleasesbyCatalogue/49F8475B31112582CA25853600764041
Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2020b, May 1). Household impacts of COVID-19 survey, 14-17 apr 2020 (Cat. no. 4940.0).
Australian Bureau of Statistics. Retrieved May 7, 2020, from https : / / www. abs . gov. au / ausstats / abs % 40 . nsf /
mediareleasesbyCatalogue/DB259787916733E4CA25855B0003B21C?OpenDocument
Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2020c, May 5). Weekly payroll jobs and wages in australia, week ending 18 april 2020
(Cat. no. 6160.0.55.001) [Library Catalog: www.abs.gov.au Publisher: c=AU; o=Commonwealth of Australia;
ou=Australian Bureau of Statistics]. Australian Bureau of Statistics. Library Catalog: www.abs.gov.au Publisher:
c=AU; o=Commonwealth of Australia; ou=Australian Bureau of Statistics. Retrieved May 7, 2020, from https : / /
www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/6160.0.55.001Main+Features1Week%20ending%2018%20April%
202020?OpenDocument
Australian Government Department of Health. (2020, March 28). New and cumulative COVID-19 cases in australia by notification date [Australian government department of health]. Retrieved April 26, 2020, from https://www.health.gov.au/
resources/publications/new-and-cumulative-covid-19-cases-in-australia-by-notification-date
Brantingham, P., & Brantingham, P. (1993, January 1). Environment, routing and situation: Toward a pattern theory of crime
(R. V. G. Clarke & M. Felson, Eds.) [Google-Books-ID: C2mtbSIqHp4C]. In R. V. G. Clarke & M. Felson (Eds.),
Routine activity and rational choice. Google-Books-ID: C2mtbSIqHp4C. New Brunswick, Transaction Publishers.
Brantingham, P., & Brantingham, P. (1995). Criminality of place: Crime generators and crime attractors. European journal on
criminal policy and research, 3(3), 5–26. Retrieved March 17, 2017, from http://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.
1007/BF02242925.pdf
Brooks, S. K., Webster, R. K., Smith, L. E., Woodland, L., Wessely, S., Greenberg, N., & Rubin, G. J. (2020). The psychological
impact of quarantine and how to reduce it: Rapid review of the evidence [Publisher: Elsevier]. The Lancet, 395(10227),
912–920. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30460-8
Campedelli, G. M., Aziani, A., & Favarin, S. (2020). Exploring the effect of 2019-nCoV containment policies on crime: The
case of los angeles. arXiv:2003.11021 [econ, q-fin, stat], arxiv 2003.11021. https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/gcpq8
10

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

Cohen, L. E., & Felson, M. (1979). Social change and crime rate trends: A routine activity approach. American Sociological
Review, 44(4), 588–608. https://doi.org/10.2307/2094589
Davey, M. (2020, April 21). Victoria police respond to family violence risk during ’very stressful time’ of coronavirus [The
guardian]. Retrieved April 27, 2020, from https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2020/apr/21/victoria-policerespond - to - family - violence - risk - during - very - stressful - time - of - coronavirus ? CMP = Share AndroidApp Direct
Message
Dowling, C., & Morgan, A. (2016). Predicting repeat domestic violence: Improving police risk assessment. Trends & Issues in
Crime and Criminal Justice, 581, 1–16.
Eisner, M., & Nivette, A. (2020). Violence and the pandemic: Urgent questions for research. Harry Frank Guggenheim Foundation. New York.
Elbogen, E. B., & Johnson, S. C. (2009). The intricate link between violence and mental disorder: Results from the national
epidemiologic survey on alcohol and related conditions. Archives of General Psychiatry, 66(2), 152–161. https://doi.
org/10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2008.537
Europol. (2020). Catching the virus cybercrime, disinformation and the COVID-19 pandemic. European Union Agency for Law
Enforcement Cooperation. The Hague, Netherlands. Retrieved April 25, 2020, from https://www.europol.europa.eu/
publications-documents/catching-virus-cybercrime-disinformation-and-covid-19-pandemic
Farrell, G., & Tilley, N. (2020). Coronavirus: How crime changes during a lockdown [The conversation]. Retrieved April 25,
2020, from http://theconversation.com/coronavirus-how-crime-changes-during-a-lockdown-134948
Fitz-Gibbon, K., & Meyer, S. (2020, March 18). Coronavirus: Fear of family violence spike as COVID-19 impact hits households [Lens: Pioneering research stories, commentary and opinion told by leading academics – monash university].
Retrieved April 25, 2020, from https://lens.monash.edu/@politics-society/2020/03/18/1379841?slug=coronavirusfear-of-family-violence-spike-as-covid-19-impact-hits-households
Foundation for Alcohol Research {and} Education. (2020, April 15). Many australians using more alcohol and worried about
household drinking [FARE] [Library Catalog: fare.org.au Section: Media releases]. Retrieved April 28, 2020, from
https://fare.org.au/many-australians-using-more-alcohol-and-worried-about-household-drinking/
Freeman, K. (2020). Monitoring changes in domestic violence in the wake of COVID-19 social isolation measures. Crime and
Justice Statistics Bureau Brief, 145, 4.
Gerell, M., Kardell, J., & Kindgren, J. (2020). Minor covid-19 association with crime in sweden, a five week follow up. https:
//doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/w7gka
Goodman, C. (2020, April 29). Mental health meltdown looms for south florida, and coronavirus is the trigger. Retrieved
April 29, 2020, from https : / / www. sun - sentinel . com / coronavirus / fl - ne - mental - health - meltdown - 20200428 43wy4b6tu5ggfg4uymkwmwl5my-story.html
Google. (2020, April 26). COVID-19 community mobility report [Google]. Retrieved April 27, 2020, from https://www.google.
com/covid19/mobility
Graham, K., Bernards, S., Wilsnack, S. C., & Gmel, G. (2010). Alcohol may not cause partner violence but it seems to make
it worse: A cross national comparison of the relationship between alcohol and severity of partner violence [Publisher: SAGE PublicationsSage CA: Los Angeles, CA]. Journal of Interpersonal Violence. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0886260510370596
Graham, K., Leonard, K. E., Room, R., Wild, T. C., Pihl, R. O., Bois, C., & Single, E. (1998). Current directions in research on
understanding and preventing intoxicated aggression [ eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1046/j.13600443.1998.9356593.x]. Addiction, 93(5), 659–676. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1360-0443.1998.9356593.x
Hulme, S., Morgan, A., & Boxall, H. (2019). Domestic violence offenders, prior offending and reoffending in australia. Trends
& Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice, 580, 1–22.
Jackson, A. (2020, April 10). A crisis mental-health hotline has seen an 891% spike in calls. Retrieved April 10, 2020, from
https://www.cnn.com/2020/04/10/us/disaster-hotline-call-increase-wellness-trnd/index.html
Kinner, S. A., Young, J. T., Snow, K., Southalan, L., Lopez-Acuña, D., Ferreira-Borges, C., & O’Moore, É. (2020). Prisons and
custodial settings are part of a comprehensive response to COVID-19 [Publisher: Elsevier]. The Lancet Public Health,
5(4), e188–e189. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2468-2667(20)30058-X
Lum, C., Maupin, C., & Stoltz, M. (2020, April 13). The impact of COVID-19 on law enforcement agencies (wave 1). International Association of Chiefs of Police and the Center for Evidence-Based Crime Policy, George Mason University.
Washington, D.C.
Midoes, C. (2020, April 7). Social distancing: Did individuals act before governments? Retrieved April 25, 2020, from https:
//www.bruegel.org/2020/04/social-distancing-did-individuals-act-before-governments/
Miller, P., Bruno, R., Morgan, A., Mayshak, R., Cox, E., Coomber, K., Droste, N., Taylor, N., Dimitrovski, N., Peacock, A.,
Boxall, H., & Voce, I. (2016). Drug and alcohol intoxication and subsequent harm in night-time entertainment districts
(DASHED) (Monograph Series No. 67). National Drug Law Enforcement Research Fund. Canberra.
Mohler, G., Bertozzi, A., Carter, J., Short, M., Sledge, D., Tita, G., Uchida, C., & Brantingham, P. (2020). Impact of social
distancing during COVID-19 pandemic on crime in indianapolis.

11

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

Nivette, A., Ribeaud, D., Murray, A. L., Steinhoff, A., Bechtiger, L., Hepp, U., Shanahan, L., & Eisner, M. (2020). Noncompliance with COVID-19-related public health measures among young adults: Insights from a longitudinal cohort
study. https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/8edbj
Pearson, E. (2020, April 3). Family violence calls drop amid fears victims can’t safely seek help while in lockdown [The age].
Retrieved April 27, 2020, from https://www.theage.com.au/national/victoria/family-violence-calls-drop-amid-fearsvictims-can-t-safely-seek-help-while-in-lockdown-20200401-p54fzq.html
Peterman, A., Potts, A., O’Donnell, M., Thompson, K., Shah, N., Oertelt-Prigione, S., & Van Gelder, N. (2020, April 1). Pandemics and violence against women and children (CGD Working Paper No. 528) [Library Catalog: www.cgdev.org].
Center for Global Development. Library Catalog: www.cgdev.org. Washington, DC. Retrieved April 27, 2020, from
https://www.cgdev.org/publication/pandemics-and-violence-against-women-and-children
Queensland Government. (2020, April 30). Queensland offence rates - open data portal [SBS]. Retrieved April 30, 2020, from
https://www.data.qld.gov.au/dataset/offence-rates-monthly-from-july-1997
Rossner, M., & Tait, D. (2020, April 8). Courts are moving to video during coronavirus, but research shows it’s hard to
get a fair trial remotely [The conversation] [Library Catalog: theconversation.com]. Retrieved April 29, 2020, from
http://theconversation.com/courts-are-moving-to-video-during-coronavirus-but-research-shows-its-hard-to-get-afair-trial-remotely-134386
Shepherd, B. (2020, April 9). Coronavirus pressures see extra focus placed on family and domestic violence [ABC news].
Retrieved April 27, 2020, from https : / / www. abc . net . au / news / 2020 - 04 - 09 / coronavirus - family - and - domestic violence-fears-grow/12136652
Talwar, R. (2020, April 17). Coronavirus lockdown: Domestic violence complaints in australia rise even as reports by phone
fall [SBS]. Retrieved April 27, 2020, from https://www.sbs.com.au/language/english/audio/coronavirus-lockdowndomestic-violence-complaints-in-australia-rise-even-as-reports-by-phone-fall
Tate, A. (2020, April 21). Domestic violence danger during coronavirus sparks urgent calls for cash [The new daily]. Retrieved
April 27, 2020, from https://thenewdaily.com.au/news/2020/04/21/coronavirus-lockdown-domestic-violence-help/
Tuohy, W. (2020, April 12). Helpline calls by family violence perpetrators ’skyrocket’ amid isolation [The age]. Retrieved April
27, 2020, from https : / / www. theage . com . au / national / victoria / helpline - calls - by - family - violence - perpetrators skyrocket-amid-isolation-20200410-p54iw7.html
Usher, K., Bhullar, N., Durkin, J., Gyamfi, N., & Jackson, D. (n.d.). Family violence and COVID-19: Increased vulnerability and
reduced options for support. International Journal of Mental Health Nursing, n/a. https://doi.org/10.1111/inm.12735
van Gelder, N., Peterman, A., Potts, A., O’Donnell, M., Thompson, K., Shah, N., & Oertelt-Prigione, S. (2020). COVID19: Reducing the risk of infection might increase the risk of intimate partner violence [Publisher: Elsevier]. EClinicalMedicine, 0(0). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2020.100348
Voce, I., & Boxall, H. (2018). Who reports domestic violence to police? a review of the evidence. Trends & Issues in Crime
and Criminal Justice, 559, 1–16.
Women’s Safety NSW. (2020, April 2). New domestic violence survey shows impact of COVID-19 on the rise [Women’s safety
NSW]. Retrieved April 27, 2020, from https://www.womenssafetynsw.org.au/impact/article/new-domestic-violencesurvey-shows-impact-of-covid-19-on-the-rise/
World Health Organization. (2020, January 30). WHO director-general’s statement on IHR emergency committee on novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) [World health organization] [Library Catalog: www.who.int]. Retrieved April 29, 2020,
from https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/who-director-general-s-statement-on-ihr-emergency-committee-onnovel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov)

12

13

Description
Constant only
Seasonal differencing
Trend differencing
Seasonal & Trend differencing
Model 4 with Seasonal MA1
Model 4 with Seasonal AR1
Model 4 with Seasonal AR1 & MA1
Model 5 with Trend MA1
Model 5 with Trend AR1
Model 5 with Trend AR1 & MA1
Model 4 with Trend MA1 & MA12

Specification
ARIMA(0,0,0)SARIMA(0,0,0,12)
ARIMA(0,0,0)SARIMA(0,1,0,12)
ARIMA(0,1,0)SARIMA(0,0,0,12)
ARIMA(0,1,0)SARIMA(0,1,0,12)
ARIMA(0,1,0)SARIMA(0,1,1,12)
ARIMA(0,1,0)SARIMA(1,1,0,12)
ARIMA(0,1,0)SARIMA(1,1,1,12)
ARIMA(0,1,1)SARIMA(0,1,1,12)
ARIMA(1,1,0)SARIMA(0,1,1,12)
ARIMA(1,1,1)SARIMA(0,1,1,12)
ARIMA(0,1,1 12)SARIMA(0,1,0,12)

Note: Final model indicated in bold. Source: Queensland Offence rates, Open Data Portal

Model
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Table 1: ARIMA Model Selection for COMMON ASSAULT (Feb 2014 - Feb 2020)
Obs
73
73
73
73
73
73
73
73
73
73
73

ll(model)
-137.31
-125.93
-120.77
-116.29
-105.11
-113.39
-104.49
-105.10
-107.99
-104.60
-101.99

df
2
1
1
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
3

AIC
278.62
253.87
243.54
234.58
212.21
230.78
212.97
216.20
221.98
217.21
209.97

BIC
283.20
256.16
245.83
236.87
214.50
235.36
217.55
223.07
228.85
226.37
216.84

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

14

0.93

/sigma

0.09

0.13
0.18

std. err.

Model: ARIMA(0,1,1 12) SARIMA(0,1,0,12)
Source: Queensland Offence rates, Open Data Portal

-0.45
-0.55

Trend
MA1
MA12

coeff

0.00

0.00
0.00

p

Table 2: ARIMA Model parameters for COMMON ASSAULT (Feb 2014 - Feb 2020)

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

15

Description
Constant only
Seasonal differencing
Trend differencing
Seasonal & Trend differencing
Model 4 with Seasonal MA1
Model 4 with Seasonal AR1
Model 4 with Seasonal AR1 & MA1
Model 5 with Trend MA1
Model 5 with Trend AR1
Model 5 with Trend AR1 & MA1

Specification
ARIMA(0,0,0)SARIMA(0,1,0,12)
ARIMA(0,0,0)SARIMA(0,1,0,12)
ARIMA(0,1,0)SARIMA(0,0,0,12)
ARIMA(0,1,0)SARIMA(0,1,0,12)
ARIMA(0,1,0)SARIMA(0,1,1,12)
ARIMA(0,1,0)SARIMA(1,1,0,12)
ARIMA(0,1,0)SARIMA(1,1,1,12)
ARIMA(0,1,1)SARIMA(0,1,1,12)
ARIMA(1,1,0)SARIMA(0,1,1,12)
ARIMA(1,1,1)SARIMA(0,1,1,12)

Note: Final model indicated in bold. Source: Queensland Offence rates, Open Data Portal

Model
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Table 3: ARIMA Model Selection for SERIOUS ASSAULT (Feb 2014 - Feb 2020)
Obs
73
73
73
73
73
73
73
73
73
73

ll(model)
-162.89
-133.92
-123.21
-118.66
-106.03
-113.10
-105.90
-101.75
-105.08
-101.65

df
2
1
1
1
1
2
3
3
3
4

AIC
329.77
269.83
248.43
239.33
214.07
230.19
217.80
209.51
216.16
211.30

BIC
334.35
272.12
250.72
241.62
216.36
234.78
224.67
216.38
223.03
220.47

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

16

0.96

/sigma

0.08

0.12

0.12

std. err.

Model: ARIMA(0,1,1) SARIMA(1,1,0,12)
Source: Queensland Offence rates, Open Data Portal

-0.33

-0.58

coeff

Seasonal
AR1

Trend
MA1

0.00

0.01

0.00

p

Table 4: ARIMA Model parameters for SERIOUS ASSAULT (Feb 2014 - Feb 2020)

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

17

Description
Constant only
Seasonal differencing
Trend differencing
Seasonal & Trend differencing
Model 1 with Trend AR1
Model 1 with Trend MA1
Model 1 with Trend AR1 & MA1
Model 1 with Trend AR2
Model 1 with Trend MA2
Model 1 with Trend AR2 & MA2

Specification
ARIMA(0,0,0)SARIMA(0,1,0,12)
ARIMA(0,0,0)SARIMA(0,1,0,12)
ARIMA(0,1,0)SARIMA(0,0,0,12)
ARIMA(0,1,0)SARIMA(0,1,0,12)
ARIMA(1,0,0)
ARIMA(0,0,1)
ARIMA(1,0,1)
ARIMA(2,0,0)
ARIMA(0,0,2)
ARIMA(2,0,2)

Note: Final model indicated in bold. Source: Queensland Offence rates, Open Data Portal

Model
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Table 5: ARIMA Model Selection for SEXUAL OFFENCES (Feb 2014 - Feb 2020)
Obs
73
73
73
73
73
73
73
73
73
73

ll(model)
-133.77
-153.33
-154.86
-173.67
-133.24
-133.37
-133.14
-132.60
-130.64
-129.26

df
2
1
1
1
3
3
4
4
4
6

AIC
271.54
308.66
311.72
349.35
272.49
272.75
274.28
273.20
269.29
270.52

BIC
276.12
310.95
314.01
351.64
279.36
279.62
283.44
282.36
278.45
284.26

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

18

10.96
1.45

Constant
/sigma

0.16
0.31

0.12
0.11

std. err.

Model: ARIMA(0,0,2)
Source: Queensland Offence rates, Open Data Portal

0.24
0.36

TREND
MA1
MA2

coeff

0.00
0.00

0.04
0.00

p

Table 6: ARIMA Model parameters for SEXUAL OFFENCES (Feb 2014 - Feb 2020)

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

19

Description
Constant only
Seasonal differencing
Trend differencing
Seasonal & Trend differencing
Model 4 with Seasonal MA1
Model 4 with Seasonal AR1
Model 4 with Seasonal AR1 & MA1
Model 7 with Trend MA1
Model 7 with Trend AR1
Model 7 with Trend AR2 & MA2
Model 5 with Trend AR2

Specification
ARIMA(0,0,0)SARIMA(0,1,0,12)
ARIMA(0,0,0)SARIMA(0,1,0,12)
ARIMA(0,1,0)SARIMA(0,0,0,12)
ARIMA(0,1,0)SARIMA(0,1,0,12)
ARIMA(0,1,0)SARIMA(0,1,1,12)
ARIMA(0,1,0)SARIMA(1,1,0,12)
ARIMA(0,1,0)SARIMA(1,1,1,12)
ARIMA(0,1,1)SARIMA(1,1,1,12)
ARIMA(1,1,0)SARIMA(1,1,1,12)
ARIMA(1,1,1)SARIMA(1,1,1,12)
ARIMA(1,1,0)SARIMA(0,1,1,12)

Obs
73
73
73
73
73
73
73
73
73
73
73

ll(model)
-263.96
-238.26
-197.05
-182.59
-172.76
-176.44
-172.10
-166.02
-165.11
-165.11
-165.87

df
2
1
1
1
2
2
2
4
3
4
3

AIC
531.92
478.52
396.09
367.18
349.53
356.88
348.19
340.03
336.23
338.23
337.75

Note: Model 9 could not estimate a parameter for the Seasonal AR1 term and the term was omitted from the model.
Model 11 removes the SAR1 term and provides a superior fit to the data. Source: Queensland Offence rates, Open Data Portal

Model
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Table 7: ARIMA Model Selection for DOMESTIC VIOLENCE BREACH offences (Feb 2014 - Feb 2020)
BIC
536.50
480.81
398.38
369.47
354.11
361.46
352.77
349.19
343.10
347.39
344.62

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

20

2.17

/sigma

0.26

0.24

0.09

std. err.

Model: ARIMA(1,1,0) SARIMA(0,1,1,12)
Source: Queensland Offence rates, Open Data Portal

-0.80

-0.42

coeff

Seasonal
MA1

Trend
AR1

0.00

0.00

0.00

p

Table 8: ARIMA Model parameters for DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ORDER BREACH offences (Feb 2014 - Feb 2020)

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

List of Figures
1

New and cumulative confirmed COVID-19 cases by notification date . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22

2

Changes in mobility over time, Australia, 15 February – 30 April . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

23

3

Changes in mobility (as at 30 April 2020), by location type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

4

Long-term COMMON ASSAULT rates (observed rates and ARIMA forecasts) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25

5

Long-term SERIOUS ASSAULT rates (observed rates and ARIMA forecasts) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

26

6

Long-term SEXUAL OFFENCE rates (observed rates and ARIMA forecasts) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

27

7

Short-term DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ORDER BREACH rates (observed rates and ARIMA forecasts) . . . . .

28

21

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

Figure 1: New and cumulative confirmed COVID-19 cases by notification date

Source: Australian Government Department of Health, 2020b

22

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

Figure 2: Changes in mobility over time, Australia, 15 February – 30 April

Source: Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Report

23

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

Figure 3: Changes in mobility (as at 30 April 2020), by location type

Source: Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Report

24

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

Figure 4: Long-term COMMON ASSAULT rates (observed rates and ARIMA forecasts)

Source: Queensland offence rates, Open Data Portal

25

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

Figure 5: Long-term SERIOUS ASSAULT rates (observed rates and ARIMA forecasts)

Source: Queensland offence rates, Open Data Portal

26

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

Figure 6: Long-term SEXUAL OFFENCE rates (observed rates and ARIMA forecasts)

Source: Queensland offence rates, Open Data Portal

27

A PREPRINT - M AY 2020

Figure 7: Short-term DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ORDER BREACH rates (observed rates and ARIMA forecasts)

Source: Queensland offence rates, Open Data Portal

28

