American Exceptionalism:
Determinants of spreading COVID-19
misinformation online in five countries

Mark Pickup

Simon Fraser University
mark_pickup@sfu.ca

Dominik A. Stecula

Clifton van der Linden

Colorado State University
McMaster University
dominik.stecula@colostate.edu cliff.vanderlinden@mcmaster.ca

This is a pre-print. This manuscript has not been peer-reviewed.
Version 1.0

Abstract
Social media have long been considered a venue in which conspiracy theories originate
and spread. It has been no different during COVID-19. However, understanding who
spreads conspiracy theories by sharing them on social media, and why, has been
underexplored, especially in a cross-national context. The global nature of the novel
coronavirus pandemic presents a unique opportunity to understand the exposure and
sharing of the same COVID-19 related conspiracies across multiple countries. We rely
on large, nationally representative surveys conducted in July of 2020 in the United
States, United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, to begin to understand
who shares conspiracies on social media and what motivates them. We find that
Americans are no more likely to encounter prominent COVID-19 conspiracies on social
media but are considerably more likely to subsequently share them. In all countries,
trust in information from social media predicts conspiracy theory sharing, while in the
US politics plays a unique role Our results make clear that American behavior on social
media has the potential to poison online public discourse globally.
Main
Since the emergence of the novel coronavirus pandemic, social scientists have been
working on identifying causes and correlates of COVID-19 related attitudes and
behaviors. A lot of that focus has been centered on COVID-19 misinformation, and
specifically endorsement of different coronavirus related conspiracy theories. These
conspiracies matter, because belief in them has been found to have implications for
public health behavior, such as compliance with mask wearing or social distancing, or
willingness to accept a COVID-19 vaccine when it becomes available. Much of this
research has focused on social media, as the environment in which these theories
originate and proliferate1,2. Existing research, however, does not really shed light onto
who is sharing and proliferating these conspiracies on social media, nor does it explore
these behaviors across different national contexts. In fact, the bulk of the existing work
has focused on the United States. In this article, we examine individual level predictors
of sharing, and therefore spreading, COVID-19 conspiracies online based on the results
of five large, nationally representative surveys fielded during the pandemic (July of
2020) in the United States, Canada, United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand.
We find that seeing conspiracy theories online and trusting that social media provides
factual and objective information on COVID-19 are important predictors of sharing
conspiracies. This is true across all five countries in our study, but the US stands out
in terms of the extent to which seeing a conspiracy translates into sharing it. We also
find that the US is distinct in the degree to which political factors such as populism
and ideology predict the sharing of conspiracies online. This is consistent with
evidence that COVID-19 is more politicized in the US compared to other nations. Finally,
we find some evidence that in countries in which political considerations are not a
determinant, trust in health officials is a predictor of sharing conspiracies. Trust that

1

health officials provide factual and objective information reduces such sharing of
conspiracies.
The emergence of the global pandemic in 2020 presented a ripe opportunity for the
spread of a variety of conspiracy theories pertaining to the origins of the pandemic,
the severity of COVID-19, and the ways of dealing with it. At the beginning of the
pandemic, a handful of conspiracies about the virus escaping from a Wuhan lab, or
that it is a bioweapon circulated heavily3. Over time, however, an increasing amount of
conspiracies surrounding COVID-19 began to emerge. Beyond just being inaccurate,
these beliefs have real world consequences. Scholars have demonstrated that those
believing in COVID-19 conspiracies were less likely to engage in social distancing,
increased handwashing, mask wearing, and other public health recommended
behaviors4,5,6,7. Additionally, people holding these beliefs are more likely to reject the
COVID-19 vaccine, which is consistent with general work on conspiracy theories and
vaccine intention1,5,8,9,10. Finally, they might have consequences beyond the realm of
public health, as these beliefs might also fuel racially-charged attacks against Asian
Americans2,11.
Social media have been identified as one of the key venues in which conspiracy
theories originate and spread2,12. Previous work in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic shows an important role that the information environment plays on being
misinformed about COVID-19 and believing in various conspiracy theories. Those who
rely on social media for information have been found to be more misinformed about
basic facts surrounding the novel coronavirus and endorse various conspiracies
related to it4,13,14. Researchers have also found that these conspiracies then frequently
enter the mainstream, amplified by traditional media outlets2. For example, in the early
days of the pandemic, conspiracy theories about coronavirus being a bioweapon or
escaping from a lab in Wuhan were amplified by conservative news media in the United
States3.
In this paper, we focus on the viewing and sharing of the following seven conspiracy
theories:
The Chinese government engineered the coronavirus in a lab.
The pharmaceutical industry is involved in the spread of the coronavirus.
There is a link between 5G technology and the coronavirus.
The United States military developed the coronavirus as a bioweapon.
Bill Gates is using the coronavirus to push a vaccine with a microchip capable of
tracking people.
● The coronavirus escaped from a lab in Wuhan.
● The worldwide death toll from COVID-19 is highly exaggerated.
●
●
●
●
●

These are, by no means, all of the COVID-19 conspiracies. Given the global nature of
the crisis and the impact COVID-19 has had on the lives of nearly everyone on the
2

planet, the amount of different theories, or the different versions of the above theories
has been staggering. But these theories have been some of the most popular forms of
misinformation surrounding COVID-1915. Furthermore, these claims originated on
obscure websites or on nebulous social media profiles, and were proliferated by other
social media accounts15,16. For example, the claim that “Bill Gates is using the
coronavirus to push a vaccine with a microchip capable of tracking people” has its
origins on an obscure website BioHackInfo.com, and it was then amplified by a
YouTube video from the Jacksonville, Florida-based Law of Liberty Baptist Church15.
Thanks to the research highlighted above, we know that conspiracy theory beliefs
matter, and that these theories tend to spread on social media. What we know much
less about is who exactly spreads these theories by sharing them online and why do
they engage in such behavior. This is the motivating question of our work. Based on
existing research, we derive several expectations for who will share COVID-19
conspiracies on their social network accounts. First, we expect that those who report
seeing conspiracy theories on social media will be more likely to share them. As the
work of Van Bavel and co-authors17 shows, one does not have to believe in conspiracy
theories to share them online, but being exposed to these theories is of crucial
importance.
We also expect that trust is an important determinant of sharing. For starters,
conspiracy theories generally spread expeditiously under the conditions of high
uncertainty and low trust in official information sources2. Previous work also highlights
the importance of trust in health officials to acceptance of common vaccine-related
misinformation6,18. As a result, we expect to see those who trust that the information
from health officials as factual and objective to be less likely to share conspiracy
theories. On the flip side, we expect those who trust information coming from social
media to engage in more sharing of these conspiracies19.
We also expect politics to play a big role as a determinant of spreading conspiracies
online, at both the individual and country level. First, previous work has shown that,
especially during a pandemic, populist attitudes are an important determinant of
conspiracy theory endorsement7. That is because some of the key components of
populist attitudes include anti-elitism and anti-intellectualism, which play a big role
in rejecting public health information from experts. Furthermore, because populism
can thrive across the traditional left-right political spectrum, it is an important
independent driver of conspiracy theory endorsement, above and beyond partisanship
or ideology7. As a result, we expect those high in populism to be more likely to share
conspiracy theories on social media than those low in populism.
Secondly, ideology might play a role in sharing COVID-related conspiracy theories on
social media. In general, there is not a clear relationship between left-right ideology

3

and belief in conspiracy theories. A lot depends on the conspiracy theory itself, and
who it identifies as a culprit and the victims20. At the same time, in the context of the
COVID-19 pandemic specifically, researchers have discovered that, in general,
conservatives have been more likely to endorse COVID-19 conspiracies, including
outside of the United States6,21,22. Furthermore, broader political considerations, such
as ideology, have been found to be associated with a variety of COVID-related attitudes
and behaviors, in both the US and elsewhere23,24,25. Additionally, behavioral evidence of
sharing misinformation during the 2016 Presidential election in the US suggests that
conservatives were much more likely to share fake news than liberals, though part of
that pattern is likely due to the fact that most fake news in that election cycle was
targeted to conservatives26. As a result, we expect left-right ideology to play a role in
sharing conspiracy theories on social media, with conservatives (those identifying as
political right) being more likely to share them than liberals (those identifying as
political left).
For the same reason that we expect ideology to play a role, trust in government may
also be important. Part of this is because a general distrust of government is an
important element of populism. Beyond that, trust in government is likely driven by
partisanship. Those that identify with the party in government are more likely to trust
the government and the information coming from the government. Meanwhile, those
that did not identify with the party in government are more likely to distrust the
government and the information from it. To the extent that a government engages with
COVID-related conspiracies, this partisan motivated trust could have consequences for
whether an individual shares conspiracy related information.
This highlights the importance of the political context of COVID-19 conspiracy
information. As scholars have noted, the pandemic has been exceptionally politicized
in some parts of the world27. During the early days of the pandemic, President Donald
Trump, and his allies in the conservative media downplayed the danger of the novel
coronavirus and accused other news sources and Democratic politicians of creating
mass hysteria and panic. The tone of coverage changed after President Trump declared
a national emergency on March 13, 2020, but the broader point is that from the very
beginning, politicians across the political spectrum in the US were sending very
different signals about the nature of COVID-193,28. That politicization was not the case
in a lot of other countries. In Canada, for example, there was (mostly) a consensus
among political elites about the coronavirus during the early stages of COVID-19
pandemic29.
To highlight just how politicized COVID-19 has been in the US compared to the other
countries in our study, we have gathered original data from the MediaCloud Explorer
database, following the work of Motta and coauthors3. We calculated how politicized
national news media coverage of COVID-19 is in each country from January 1, 2020 to
July 1, 2020, which is a period of time preceding when our surveys were fielded (details
on how we identified politicized media coverage is available in the Methods section).
Consistent with expectations, we find that national news media is most politicized in
4

the United States (26%, or more than a quarter of all COVID-19 coverage, is politicized
in the US, compared to only 13% in Canada). We also find that in terms of volume, the
sheer amount of politicized news coverage in the US vastly exceeds the volume of
politicized coverage in other countries. In fact, there are considerably more politicized
stories in the national US news media than in the other four countries combined. We
expect political considerations to matter the most in countries where COVID-19 has
been the most politicized. As a result, we expect to see a bigger role for politics
(ideology, populism and trust in government information) in the United States than in
the other countries.
Figure 1. Politicization of COVID-19 News Coverage by Country

Note: number and percent of COVID-19 media stories between January
1 and July 1, 2020 that were politicized, and each of the five countries.
Our analysis relies on data from the Vox Pop Labs COVID-19 Monitor initiative. Surveys
were conducted in the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and New
Zealand in July of 2020. We have a large, nationally representative sample from each
country and the total 𝑁 is 6,956. To ensure representativeness, we pre-stratified on the
basis of age, sex and geography. Post-stratification weights are based on age,
education, sex and past vote. In Australia/UK we also used state/region, and in New
Zealand we also used Maori identification.
In our analysis, we examine the transmission rates of COVID-19 conspiracies online.
Just because an individual sees a conspiracy theory online does not mean they will
share it. Therefore, knowing the degree to which the viewing of conspiracies translates
5

into sharing them and how that differs across countries is important. We also use a
linear model to evaluate the other predictors of sharing that we have identified: trust
in social media, trust in health officials, populism, ideology and trust in government.
In the linear model, we control for age, gender, education, use of digital news media,
and trust in the pharmaceutical industry. This last control is included because one of
the conspiracy theories explicitly mentions pharmaceutical industry, and distrust of
“Big Pharma” plays a prominent role in vaccine misinformation18.
Results
To begin answering the question 'who is sharing COVID-19 conspiracies?', we first
examine the average frequency with which these conspiracies are seen and shared in
each country (Figure 2). The frequency with which a respondent views these
conspiracies is measured with the question: ‘How often do you encounter stories and
posts about any of these claims online, for example on social media platforms like
Facebook, Twitter, or YouTube?’. The frequency with which a respondent shares these
conspiracies is measured with the question: ‘Whether or not you agree with them, how
often do you yourself share stories and posts about any of these claims online, for
example on social media platforms like Facebook, Twitter or YouTube? ‘ The response
scales for both questions is the same: 0-Never to 10-All the time.

6

Figure 2. Distribution of Seeing and Sharing COVID-19 Conspiracies by Country

Mean Frequency (0-Never to 10-Always)

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
Australia

New Zealand

US

Canada

UK

Seen
Share

Note: the average frequency (from 0 equals never to 10 equals
always) a respondent sees and shares COVID-19 related
conspiracies online, in each country (with 95% confidence
interval). 𝑁 = 1,275 (US); 1,376 (Canada); 1,107 (UK); 1,976
(Australia); 1,222 (New Zealand).
We see that respondents in Australia report seeing these conspiracies least often, on
average, (3.87 on the 0 to 10 scale) and respondents in the UK report seeing these
conspiracies most often (4.91). We also can see that there is a correspondence between
the average frequency with which the COVID-19 conspiracies are seen and the average
frequency with which they are shared, and the frequency with which the conspiracies
are shared is a small fraction of the frequency with which they are seen. One country
defies this pattern. While the US falls in the middle on the frequency with which
conspiracies are seen (4.27), it far surpasses all other countries on the frequency with
which conspiracies are shared. In the US, the average frequency with which
conspiracies are shared is 2.27 (on the 0 to 10 scale). This is over half the frequency
with which they are seen. The next closest nation is the UK with a share frequency of
0.77. This is less than a fifth of the frequency with which they are seen.

7

Figure 3. Transmission of COVID-19 Conspiracies by Country

Note: the average frequency (from 0 equals never to 10 equals always) COVID19 related conspiracies are shared online as a function of how often they are
seen, in each country (with 95% confidence interval). Transmission rates are
the frequency of sharing conspiracies relative to the frequency of seeing
them. 𝑁 = 1,275 (US); 1,376 (Canada); 1,107 (UK); 1,976 (Australia); 1,222 (New
Zealand).
Next, we compute the transmission rate in each country. We calculate the transmission
rate by regressing the frequency of conspiracies shared on the frequency of
conspiracies seen. Figure 3 reports the transmission rates along with a more detailed
look at the relationship between the seeing and sharing of these conspiracies.
Consistent with Figure 2, we see that the transmission rate in the US (0.47) is more than
three times that of any other country in the study – sharing a conspiracy is about half
as frequent as seeing a conspiracy. The next closest is the UK (0.13) and the lowest
transmission rate is in Australia (0.09). The figure also shows that as the frequency of
seeing these conspiracies increases, so does the frequency of sharing them. This
relationship is much stronger in the US compared to other countries. Those that
frequently view conspiracies in the US also share them much more often than
individuals that frequently view conspiracies in other countries. At the other end of
the scale, those that infrequently view conspiracies in the US share them about as
often as those that infrequently view conspiracies in other countries.

8

So far, the answer to our question 'who shares COVID-19 conspiracies' is: those that
often see them, especially Americans. To explore this further, we predict the frequency
of sharing conspiracies with our theoretically derived individual level predictors. We
do this with a linear regression model, and we include those that have seen a
conspiracy, so we are estimating the effect of these predictors conditional on having
seen a conspiracy.
In our prediction model we include variables related to the politicization of COVID-19:
populism (4 point scale), ideology (11 point scale) and trust that the information about
COVID-19 from government is factual and objective (4 point scale). We include a
variable we expect to be important when COVID-19 is not politicized: trust that the
information about COVID-19 from public health officials is factual and objective (4 point
scale). We also include similar trust in COVID-19 information from social media (4 point
scale) as a predictor of sharing COVID-19 conspiracies. Additionally, we include a
number of controls in the model: age, male (vs. female or other), whether the
respondent has a university degree, trust in pharmaceutical industry and use of digital
sources of news information. This last is measured using the respondent's estimate of
how much of their news and information on the COVID-19 pandemic they get from
online and social media. This means our estimated effects of trust in social media is
controlling for the use of these media platforms.
Figure 4 shows the results of the conspiracy sharing prediction model for each country.
Very evident from the results is that trust in social media positively predicts sharing
COVID-19 conspiracy theories in all five countries. This effect is strongest in the US,
where an increase of 1 (on the 1 to 4 scale) in trust increases the frequency of sharing
conspiracies by 1.1 (on the 0 to 10 scale).
The US is distinct in the way that political variables predict the sharing of conspiracies.
An increase of 1 (on the 0 to 10 scale) in liberal/conservative scale increases the
frequency of sharing conspiracies by 0.4. An increase of 1 (on the 1 to 4 scale) in
populism increases the frequency of sharing conspiracies by 0.9. Ideology does not
have an effect in any other country. The only other country where populism predicts
conspiracy sharing is in New Zealand, although it does predict conspiracy sharing in
the UK with a P-value of 0.053. To the extent that there are political effects on sharing
conspiracies, these appear to be captured by ideology and populism as trust in the
national/federal government does not have a statistically significant effect (at the 0.05
level) in any country. However, trust in the state government does negatively predict
sharing conspiracies in the US with a P-value of 0.058.
There is weak evidence that in countries in which neither populism nor ideology
predict conspiracy sharing, trust in health officials is a predictor. In Canada, an
increase of one (on the 1 to 4 scale) in trust in health officials reduces the frequency
of sharing conspiracies by 0.4 (P-value = 0.004). In Australia, the effect is a reduction
of 0.3 but the effect is not statistically significant at the 0.05 level (P-value = 0.065).

9

Figure 4. Predictors of Sharing COVID-19 Conspiracies on Social Media

Note: estimated effects from a linear model of hypothesized predictors frequency
of of sharing COVID-19 conspiracies on social media (and control variables). 𝑁 =
743 (US); 1,005 (Canada); 970 (UK); 1,434 (Australia); 743 (New Zealand).
Discussion
When the entire world stopped in 2020 due to the global COVID-19 pandemic, we were
presented with a rare opportunity to study determinants of the same conspiracy
beliefs and sharing across multiple countries. Regardless of where one lives,
everything changed because of COVID-19, and the conspiracy theories that emerged
were largely universal across the world. This presents us with a unique opportunity to
study the drivers of these attitudes and behaviors beyond just a single country context.
Here, we focused on five peer countries, all Western, English-speaking democracies:
the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand.
There are common themes between all five countries. Trusting the information on
social media about COVID-19 as factual and objective is an important predictor of
sharing conspiracies across all five countries in our study. In the age of declining trust
in institutions, and scholars thinking of ways to improve trust in the media, elevated
trust in social media might actually be an obstacle to reducing misinformation online.
10

It seems that skepticism about information on social media should be an important
part of any media literacy efforts.
We also find big and important differences between the countries of interest, mostly
in the form of US as an outlier. In America, respondents are no more likely to report
seeing any of the seven conspiracy theories online than respondents in the other four
countries. But they are three times more likely to share these conspiracies with their
followers than respondents in the other countries.
Part of this is likely due to the fact that, as was highlighted in Figure 1, COVID-19
pandemic has been politicized in the United States in ways unseen in other countries.
This polarized nature of COVID-19 in the US is apparent in the individual level
predictors of whether an individual shares COVID-19 conspiracy theories. Ideology is
only a significant predictor in the US, and New Zealand is the only other country for
which populism is a significant predictor. But populist sentiment is not necessarily
stronger in the US than in the other countries. For example, the US populist sentiment
has a mean of 2.4. It is the same in the UK, 2.2 in Canada and Australia, and 2.0 in New
Zealand. The difference is just that populism is related to sharing conspiracies in the
US (and New Zealand). Ideology, on the other hand, is more diverse (more polarized)
in the US compared to other nations. Ideology (0 to 10) standard deviations: US, 3.2;
Canada, 2.4; UK, 2.4; Australia, 2.3; New Zealand, 2.5. This serves to exacerbate the
ideological divide between those that do and do not share conspiracies in the US.
Our findings are consistent with recent work about the dominant role that Americans
play in sharing misinformation on social media. A study by Bridgman et al (2021),
analyzing a large dataset of Twitter users in Canada, found that the majority of
misinformation found on Twitter that is shared by Canadians is retweeted from US
accounts. Furthermore, those exposed to American accounts on Twitter were more
likely to post misinformation on their accounts. Our findings expand this notion,
showcasing the exceptional nature of American conspiracy sharing on social media.
Given the global nature of COVID-19 misinformation, this suggests that the sharing
behavior of Americans does not simply affect the American context. When Americans
flood their social media with conspiracies, it travels abroad and poisons the discourse
in other countries.
As governments around the world are trying to vaccinate their populations, containing
misinformation and conspiracy theories, particularly those regarding the COVID-19
vaccinations, is of utmost importance. Known anti-vaccine accounts continue to
spread on Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, and other platforms, despite official attempts
to ban them30. We take an important step here in trying to understand the motivations
behind the individuals who share misinformation on social media, but more research
is needed, especially into what exactly sets the US apart.

11

Methods
News media data source
The data presented in Figure 1 comes from MediaLab Explorer. We used a similar
approach to that used in Motta et al (2020). We first searched for a total number stories
related to COVID-19 in the national news media of each country between the period of
January 1, 2020 and July 1, 2020. The search protocol was: COVID OR coronavirus OR
pandemic. We then searched for references to the country’s leader and political
phrases among these stories. The search protocol was: (COVID OR coronavirus OR
pandemic) AND ( *country’s leader* OR politics OR political). The leaders were,
respectively: Donald Trump in the United States, Justin Trudeau in Canada, Boris
Johnson in the United Kingdom, Scott Morrison in Australia, and Jacinda Ardern in New
Zealand. MediaLab curates collections of national news sources for each country. In
the United States (collection # 34412234), this includes 271 sources like CNN, ABC News,
Fox News, and the New York Times. In Canada (collection #34411583), this includes 127
sources like the National Post, CBC, and the Toronto Star. In the United Kingdom
(collection #34412476), this includes 97 sources like the BBC, The Independent, and the
Guardian. In Australia (collection #34412282) this includes 62 sources like the Australian
Broadcast Company, Sydney Morning Herald, and the Daily Mail Australia. And in New
Zealand (collection #34412098), this includes 82 sources such as the New Zealand
Herald, Auckland Now, and Radio New Zealand. All of these collections are dynamic
and MediaLab occasionally changes their composition. The searches to collect the data
for this paper were conducted on March 14, 2021.
Survey data source
Respondents to our survey were recruited by Vox Pop Labs for their COVID-19 Monitor
initiative in the US (1,275 respondents; July 11- August 13, 2020), Britain (1,107
respondents; July 11-19, 2020), Canada (1,376 respondents; July 11-15, 2020), Australia
(1,976 respondents; July 10-14, 2020) and New Zealand (1,222 respondents; July 10-17,
2020). The Vox Pop Labs online respondent panel contains more than 1.2 million richlyprofiled panelists from Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, the
United States, France, Germany, and Brazil. To increase representativeness, we prestratified on the basis of age, sex and geography. Post-stratification weights are based
on age, education, sex and past vote. In Australia/UK we also used state/region, and
in
New
Zealand
we
also
used
Maori
identification.

12

Survey measures
We asked respondents about seven prominent COVID-19 related conspiracy theories:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

The Chinese government engineered the coronavirus in a lab.
The pharmaceutical industry is involved in the spread of the coronavirus.
There is a link between 5G technology and the coronavirus.
The United States military developed the coronavirus as a bioweapon.
Bill Gates is using the coronavirus to push a vaccine with a microchip capable
of tracking people.
The coronavirus escaped from a lab in Wuhan.
The worldwide death toll from COVID-19 is highly exaggerated.

We asked respondents how much truth there was to each theory but these measures
are not included in this study. Instead, to measure conspiracy theory seeing and
sharing online, respondents were asked:
•

‘How often do you encounter stories and posts about any of these claims online,
for example on social media platforms like Facebook, Twitter, or YouTube?’

•

‘How often do you encounter stories and posts about any of these claims online,
for example on social media platforms like Facebook, Twitter, or YouTube?’

The response options ranged from never (0) to all the time (10).
We measured trust in social media using responses to a question asking respondents
‘how much trust do you have in social media to provide factual and objective
information about COVID-19?’ Response options were: No trust at all (1); Little trust (2);
Moderate trust (3); A great deal of trust (4).
Trust in government is measured by using a question that asks respondents ‘how much
trust do you have in the federal government to provide factual and objective
information about COVID-19?’ Response options were: No trust at all (1); Little trust (2);
Moderate trust (3); A great deal of trust (4). Where appropriate, respondents were also
asked about their trust in the information from their provincial/state government.
Trust in public health officials is measured using the average response to questions
asking respondents ‘how much trust do you have in: [public health officials, local
health care providers, and the World Health Organization (WHO)] to provide factual
and objective information about COVID-19?’ The response categories are the same as
the other trust questions, and the measure is the average response across the three
sources.
Populism for each respondent is measure
disagreement/agreement across five items:

by

calculating

the

average

13

● [Country] is divided between ordinary people and the corrupt elites who exploit
them.
● The will of the people should be the highest principle in this country’s politics.
● It doesn’t really matter whom you vote for because the rich control all political
parties.
● I’d rather put my trust in the wisdom of ordinary people than the opinions of
experts and intellectuals.
● When it comes to really important questions, scientific facts don't help that
much.
The response options for each item is the same: Strongly disagree (1); Somewhat
disagree (2); Somewhat agree (3); Strongly agree (4); Don't know. This battery is
designed to capture two essential aspects of populism: conflict between average
citizens and elites, and distrust of experts and intellectuals. It has been used in
published research.7
Ideology Is measured using the respondent's self-placement on a left/liberal (0) to
right/conservative (10) scale.
Trust in pharmaceutical industry is measured using responses to a question asking
respondents how much trust they have in the pharmaceutical industry in general? The
response categories are the same as the other trust questions.
Use of digital news is measured by asking respondents what percentage of their news
and information on the COVID-19 pandemic they get from online and social media
sources?
Finally, age is measured in years, and university degree and male are binary (0,1)
demographic variables based on self-reports.
Analysis
The results in Figure 2 were produced by calculating the average response to the
frequency of seeing and sharing conspiracy theories online variables and the
corresponding 95% confidence interval in each country. The results in Figure 3 were
produced by calculating the average response to the sharing variable separately for
individuals grouped by their response to the seeing variable. Again, this was done
separately for each country and 95% confidence intervals were calculated. The
reported transmission rates are calculated by regressing frequency of seeing
conspiracies on frequency of sharing them in each country. The regression coefficients
were estimated by OLS and the resulting slope coefficients are the transmission rates.
Using OLS linear regression, the results in Figure 4 were produced by regressing
frequency of sharing conspiracy theories online on: trust in social media, trust in public
health officials, trust in government, populism, ideology, trust in pharmaceutical

14

industry, use of digital news, age, university degree and male. This was done for each
country and the samples were restricted to respondents to give an answer of more
than ‘0-Never’ to the question about seeing conspiracies online. The results then are
estimates of the effects of theorized predictors of sharing conspiracies, given that the
respondent had seen at least one of them at least once.

15

References
Enders, A. M., Uscinski, J. E., Klofstad, C. & Stoler, J. The different forms of COVID-19
misinformation and their consequences. Harvard Kennedy School Misinformation
Review (2020) doi:10.37016/mr-2020-48.
1

Shahsavari, S., Holur, P., Tangherlini, T. R. & Roychowdhury, V. Conspiracy in the
Time of Corona: Automatic detection of COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories in Social Media
and the News. arXiv:2004.13783 [cs] (2020).
2

Motta, M., Stecula, D. & Farhart, C. How Right-Leaning Media Coverage of COVID-19
Facilitated the Spread of Misinformation in the Early Stages of the Pandemic in the
U.S. Canadian Journal of Political Science/Revue canadienne de science politique 53,
335–342 (2020).
3

Allington, D., Duffy, B., Wessely, S., Dhavan, N. & Rubin, J. Health-protective
behaviour, social media usage and conspiracy belief during the COVID-19 public
health emergency. Psychol Med 1–7 doi:10.1017/S003329172000224X.
4

Bertin, P., Nera, K. & Delouvée, S. Conspiracy Beliefs, Rejection of Vaccination, and
Support for hydroxychloroquine: A Conceptual Replication-Extension in the COVID-19
Pandemic Context. Front. Psychol. 11, (2020).
5

Roozenbeek, J. et al. Susceptibility to misinformation about COVID-19 around the
world. Royal Society Open Science 7, 201199 (2020).
6

Stecula, D. A. & Pickup, M. How populism and conservative media fuel conspiracy
beliefs about COVID-19 and what it means for COVID-19 behaviors. Research & Politics
8, 2053168021993979 (2021).
7

Romer, D. & Jamieson, K. H. Conspiracy theories as barriers to controlling the spread
of COVID-19 in the U.S. Soc Sci Med 263, 113356 (2020).
8

Lindholt, M. F., Jørgensen, F. J., Bor, A. & Petersen, M. B. Willingness to Use an
Approved COVID-19 Vaccine: Cross-National Evidence on Levels and Individual-Level
Predictors. (2020) doi:10.31234/osf.io/8kn5f.
9

Jolley, D. & Douglas, K. M. The Effects of Anti-Vaccine Conspiracy Theories on
Vaccination Intentions. PLOS ONE 9, e89177 (2014).
10

Lu, R. & Sheng, S. Y. From Fear to Hate: How A Pandemic Sparks Racial Animus in the
United States. https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3646880 (2020)
doi:10.2139/ssrn.3646880.
11

16

Papakyriakopoulos, O., Serrano, J. C. M. & Hegelich, S. The spread of COVID-19
conspiracy theories on social media and the effect of content moderation. Harvard
Kennedy School Misinformation Review 1, (2020).
12

Bridgman, A. et al. The causes and consequences of COVID-19 misperceptions:
understanding the role of news and social media. Harvard Kennedy School
Misinformation Review 1, (2020).
13

Jamieson, K. H. & Albarracín, D. The Relation between Media Consumption and
Misinformation at the Outset of the SARS-CoV-2 Pandemic in the US. Harvard Kennedy
School Misinformation Review 1, (2020).
14

Gregory, J. & McDonald, K. Special Report: COVID-19 Myths. NewsGuard
https://www.newsguardtech.com/covid-19-myths/.
15

Klepper, D., Amiri, F. & Dupuy, B. The superspreaders behind top COVID-19
conspiracy theories. AP News https://apnews.com/article/conspiracy-theories-iranonly-on-ap-media-misinformation-bfca6d5b236a29d61c4dd38702495ffe (2021).
16

Van Bavel, J. J. et al. Political Psychology in the Digital (mis)Information age: A Model
of News Belief and Sharing. Social Issues and Policy Review 15, 84–113 (2021).
17

Stecula, D. A., Kuru, O. & Jamieson, K. H. How trust in experts and media use affect
acceptance of common anti-vaccination claims. The Harvard Kennedy School (HKS)
Misinformation Review 1, (2020).
18

Laato, S., Islam, A. K. M. N., Islam, M. N. & Whelan, E. Why do People Share
Misinformation during the COVID-19 Pandemic? European Journal of Information
Systems 29, 288–305 (2020).
19

Douglas, K. M. et al. Understanding Conspiracy Theories. Political Psychology 40, 3–
35 (2019).
20

Uscinski, J. E. et al. Why do people believe COVID-19 conspiracy theories? Harvard
Kennedy School Misinformation Review 1, (2020).
21

Pennycook, G., McPhetres, J., Bago, B. & Rand, D. Beliefs about COVID-19 in Canada,
the U.K., and the U.S.A.: A novel test of political polarization and motivated reasoning.
(2020) doi:10.31234/osf.io/zhjkp.
22

Pickup, M., Stecula, D. & Linden, C. van der. Novel Coronavirus, Old Partisanship:
COVID-19 Attitudes and Behaviours in the United States and Canada. Canadian
Journal of Political Science/Revue canadienne de science politique 53, 357–364 (2020).
23

17

Gadarian, S. K., Goodman, S. W. & Pepinsky, T. B. Partisanship, health behavior, and
policy attitudes in the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. PLOS ONE 16, e0249596
(2021).
24

Clinton, J., Cohen, J., Lapinski, J. & Trussler, M. Partisan pandemic: How partisanship
and public health concerns affect individuals’ social mobility during COVID-19.
Science Advances 7, eabd7204 (2021).
25

Guess, A., Nagler, J. & Tucker, J. Less than you think: Prevalence and predictors of
fake news dissemination on Facebook. Science Advances 5, eaau4586 (2019).
26

Abbasi, K. Covid-19: politicisation, “corruption,” and suppression of science. BMJ 371,
m4425 (2020).
27

Green, J., Edgerton, J., Naftel, D., Shoub, K. & Cranmer, S. J. Elusive consensus:
Polarization in elite communication on the COVID-19 pandemic. Science Advances 6,
eabc2717 (2020).
28

Merkley, E. et al. A Rare Moment of Cross-Partisan Consensus: Elite and Public
Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic in Canada. Canadian Journal of Political
Science/Revue canadienne de science politique 53, 311–318 (2020).
29

Ortutay, B. & Seitz, A. Defying rules, anti-vaccine accounts thrive on social media.
AP NEWS https://apnews.com/article/anti-vaccine-accounts-thrive-social-mediae796aaf1ce32d02e215d3b2021a33599 (2021).
30

18

