bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.423467; this version posted December 18, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

assayM: a web application to monitor mutations
in COVID-19 diagnostic assays.
Raeece Naeem1, Arnab Pain1,2*
Pathogen Genomics Laboratory, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, 23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
1

Research Center for Zoonosis Control, Global Institution for Collaborative Research and Education
(GI-CoRE); Hokkaido University, N20 W10 Kita-ku, Sapporo, 001-0020 Japan
2

*To whom correspondence should be addressed.

Abstract
Summary:
Reverse Transcriptase – Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) is the gold standard as diagnostic
assays for the detection of COVID-19 and the specificity and sensitivity of these assays depend on the
complementarity of the RT-PCR primers to the genome of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Since the virus mutates over time during replication cycles, there is an urgent
need to continuously monitor the virus genome for appearances of mutations and mismatches in the
PCR primers used in these assays. Here we present assayM, a web application to explore and monitor
mutations introduced in the primer and probe sequences published by the World Health Organisation
(WHO) or in any custom-designed assay primers for SARS-CoV-2 detection assays in globally available SARS-CoV-2 genome datasets.
Availability and implementation: assayM is available on https://grafnet.kaust.edu.sa/assayM as a web application and also as an open-source R shiny application, downloadable from https://github.com/raeece/assayM
Contact: arnab.pain@kaust.edu.sa

1

Introduction

The gold standard for diagnosing the SARS-CoV2 virus is the RT-PCR.
The PCR method involves a forward primer, reverse primer and probe to
detect the presence of SARS-CoV2 virus infection. There are a number of
PCR assays published in the literature (Khan and Cheung, 2020),(Wang,
et al., 2020) and recommended by the World Health Organisation (WHO)
(https://www.who.int/docs/defaultsource/coronaviruse/whoinhouseassay
s.pdf). The SARS-CoV2 virus continues to mutate and mutations appear
in the regions where the assay primers bind to the RNA strand of the virus.
As mutations accumulate in the target regions of the PCR primer and the
probe binding region in the virus genome, the diagnostic efficacy of these
assays gets reduced leading to false negative results in these tests(Wang,
et al., 2020). It is imperative to monitor the mutations acquired in the target
region to identify and redesign the primers to main a high level of sensitivity and specificity of the diagnostic assays. Samples of SARS-CoV2
virus strains are being sequenced across the world every day and made
public through Genbank(Sayers, et al., 2020) and GISAID(Shu and
McCauley, 2017). In order to track these mutations, we developed an exploratory web application assayM to visualize the impact of these mutations in the published RT-PCR primers and probes. This web application
would be useful in designing PCR Primers with the least number of mutations. This application eases the time-consuming process of downloading
newly available sequences and evaluating the diagnostic assays.

The web application is built using R language and scripts to compile
the database of mutations is written in python and available to anyone to
customize them according to their needs.

2

assayM web application

The core components required of the assayM web application are
Compiled list of published PCR primers and probe sequences.
Catalog of curated Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) and Insertions and Deletions (Indels.)
Metadata such as date of collection and geographical origin of sequences.
An integrated database and a visualization tool to search and filter regions
of interest and track their changes over time.
PCR primers and probes were collated from (Khan and Cheung, 2020)
where they evaluated 27 diagnostic probes and primers using a snapshot
of 17,000 viral sequences available at that time. (Wang, et al., 2020) also
evaluated published assays based on 31,421 sequences available in July,
2020. As of writing today there are in excess of 270,000 viral sequences
available in the global repositories and continues to grow in thousands
every two days. A catalog of curated SNPs and Indels are compiled from
sequences available on Genbank and GISAID and good quality variants
are made available for analysis every day on 2019 Novel Coronavirus
Resource (Zhao, et al., 2020). The assayM python scripts pulls the curated
multi-sample VCF file and its associated metadata from 2019 Novel

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.423467; this version posted December 18, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
R.Naeem et al.

Coronavirus resource on a weekly basis and builds an SQL database for
querying and visualisation of the regions where the mutations occur.

2.4 Conclusion
Through assayM application we have included the most essential statistics
on mutations related to diagnostic RT-PCR assays during the chaging
landscape of the COVID-19 pandemic. As the source code is written in R
shiny framework and the python scripts required to compile the mutation
database is made available one can customize the R code to include more
explorative charts and graphs on mutations in SARS-CoV2 virus.
Table 1. Table of assays with most number to least number of mutant
strains.

Fig. 1. Explore mutations in primer regions. A) This example show the number of
strains with mutations in the CN-CDC-N primer set. B) Shows the proportion of strains that

|S| Assay

Mutant strains

Assay Country Gene Target

1
2
3

CN-CDC-N
Young-S
SC2

67871
7135
6541

China
Singapore
US

N
S
N

1
2

Won-ORF1ab
CN-CDC-ORF1ab

608
903

South Korea
China

ORF1ab
ORF1ab

3

Pasteur-ORF1ab-1

909

France

ORF1ab

had mutations every month against the total number of strains deposited.

Total number of strains deposited at the time of compiling this table is 261,988

2.1 Exploring mutations in primer regions
The core functionality of assayM is to visualize the primer and probe regions and summarise the number of strains that have mutations in the target region. A genome browser with gene annotations is shown along with
the primer and probe regions. (Fig 1) The user has the ability to input and
search their custom primer and probe sequences for a match against the
SARS-CoV2 Wuhan-Hu-1 reference sequence (NCBI accession
NC_045512). The user can view any region of interest for mutations and
obtain the mutation statistics. The bar graphs summarise the proportion of
sequences that contain mutations against the total number of sequences
deposited in the sequence repositories every month. By visualizing the
mutation counts and proportion one can choose the primer regions when
designing new primers and discard existing primers if there is an indication of too many mutations that may result in reduction of specificity and
sensitivity of the assays.

Acknowledgements
We thank KAUST Pathogen Genomics group members for their comments and support.

Funding
This work has been supported by the KAUST Rapid Research Response Team
(R3T) funding and the BAS/01-01-1020 fund to Arnab Pain
Conflict of Interest: none declared.

References
Khan, K.A. and Cheung, P. Presence of mismatches between diagnostic PCR assays

2.2 Compilation of published assays

and coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 genome. Roy Soc Open Sci 2020;7(6).

A total of 34 diagnostic assays were compiled from literature review
(Khan and Cheung, 2020; Wang, et al., 2020) and assays published on
WHO website. Assays are listed in a table format where one can sort the
primer sets according to most or least number of mutations. Table 1 highlights 6 primer set where three of them contains the greatest number of
mutations and the other three with the least number of mutations among
the compiled set of 34 assays.

Sayers, E.W., et al. GenBank. Nucleic Acids Res 2020;48(D1):D84-D86.
Shu, Y.L. and McCauley, J. GISAID: Global initiative on sharing all influenza data
- from vision to reality. Eurosurveillance 2017;22(13):2-4.
Wang, R., et al. Mutations on COVID-19 diagnostic targets. Genomics 2020.
Wang, X.L., et al. Limits of Detection of 6 Approved RT-PCR Kits for the Novel
SARS-Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2). Clin Chem 2020;66(7):977-979.
Zhao, W.M., et al. The 2019 novel coronavirus resource. Yi Chuan 2020;42(2):212221.

2.3 Detailed view on SNPs and Indels
A separate tab of the application lists all the mutations occurring across all
regions of the SARS-CoV2 virus genome. For each mutation the genomic
co-ordinates, strain name, sample collection date, country of origin, mutation type (SNP/Indel), reference and alternate alleles are displayed. The
user can filter the table by genomic co-ordinates, country, collection date
or mutation type.

