bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

SARS-CoV-2 infection and replication in human fetal and pediatric gastric
organoids
Giovanni Giuseppe Giobbe1,&,*, Francesco Bonfante2,&, Elisa Zambaiti1,3,4,&, Onelia Gagliano3, Brendan C.
Jones1, Camilla Luni5, Cecilia Laterza3, Silvia Perin1, Hannah T. Stuart3, Matteo Pagliari2, Alessio
Bortolami2, Eva Mazzetto2, Anna Manfredi6, Chiara Colantuono6, Lucio Di Filippo7, Alessandro Pellegata1,
Vivian Sze Wing Li8, Simon Eaton1, Nikhil Thapar1,9, Davide Cacchiarelli6,10, Nicola Elvassore1,3,5,11,*,
Paolo De Coppi1,12,*
1

Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine Section, GOS Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, UK
Lab. of Experimental Animal Models, Division of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle
Venezie, Legnaro, Italy
3
Veneto Institute of Molecular Medicine (VIMM), Padova, Italy
4
Dept. Women’s and Children’s Health, University of Padova, Padova Italy
5
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Immunochemical Studies (SIAIS), ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
6
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Armenise/Harvard Laboratory of Integrative Genomics, Pozzuoli, Italy
7
Next Generation Diagnostic srl, Pozzuoli, Italy
8
Stem Cell and Cancer Biology Lab, the Francis Crick Institute, London, UK
9
Present address: Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Liver Transplant, Queensland Children’s Hospital, Brisbane, Australia
10
Department of Translational Medicine, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy
11
Dept. of Industrial Engineering, University of Padova, Padova, Italy
12
Dept. of Specialist Neonatal and Paediatric Surgery, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK
&
Co-first authors: Giovanni Giuseppe Giobbe, Francesco Bonfante & Elisa Zambaiti
* Co-corresponding authors: Giovanni Giuseppe Giobbe, Nicola Elvassore & Paolo De Coppi
2

Abstract
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection is a global public health emergency. COVID-19 typically manifests as
a respiratory illness but an increasing number of clinical reports describe gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms. This
is particularly true in children in whom GI symptoms are frequent and viral shedding outlasts viral clearance
from the respiratory system. By contrast, fetuses seem to be rarely affected by COVID-19, although the virus
has been detected in placentas of affected women. These observations raise the question of whether the
virus can infect and replicate within the stomach once ingested. Moreover, it is not yet clear whether active
replication of SARS-CoV-2 is possible in the stomach of children or in fetuses at different developmental
stages. Here we show the novel derivation of fetal gastric organoids from 8-21 post-conception week (PCW)
fetuses, and from pediatric biopsies, to be used as an in vitro model for SARS-CoV-2 gastric infection. Gastric
organoids recapitulate human stomach with linear increase of gastric mucin 5AC along developmental
stages, and expression of gastric markers pepsinogen, somatostatin, gastrin and chromogranin A. In order
to investigate SARS-CoV-2 infection with minimal perturbation and under steady-state conditions, we induced
a reversed polarity in the gastric organoids (RP-GOs) in suspension. In this condition of exposed apical
polarity, the virus can easily access viral receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). The pediatric
RP-GOs are fully susceptible to infection with SARS-CoV-2, where viral nucleoprotein is expressed in cells
undergoing programmed cell death, while the efficiency of infection is significantly lower in fetal organoids.
The RP-GOs derived from pediatric patients show sustained robust viral replication of SARS-CoV-2,
compared with organoids derived from fetal stomachs. Transcriptomic analysis shows a moderate innate
antiviral response and the lack of differentially expressed genes belonging to the interferon family.
Collectively, we established the first expandable human gastric organoid culture across fetal developmental
stages, and we support the hypothesis that fetal tissue seems to be less susceptible to SARS-CoV-2
infection, especially in early stages of development. However, the virus can efficiently infect gastric epithelium
in pediatric patients, suggesting that the stomach might have an active role in fecal-oral transmission of
SARS-CoV-2.
1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 is responsible for a pandemic that has proven
catastrophic, due to the lack of immunity in the human population and the range of pathological features
associated with infection, including severe and often life-threatening respiratory syndromes causing major
health, social and economic consequences. The virus has been shown to infect respiratory epithelial cells
and to spread mainly via the respiratory tract1. As governments and international health agencies seek
effective policies to minimise infections, maintain health care delivery, and eventually ease movement
restrictions, understanding the pathogenesis and the various mechanisms for transmission is of the utmost
importance. It is well established that adults are more likely than children to develop symptoms upon SARSCoV-2 infection, but little is known on the role of children in transmission of the disease. A growing body of
literature suggests that replication at the level of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract not only occurs in a large
proportion of confirmed cases2, but it also extends the overall duration of shedding, after viral clearance from
the respiratory tract has occurred3. Interestingly, infected children have been shown to be particularly prone
to develop GI symptoms which can be moderate-to-severe, leading to intensive care unit (ICU) admission
and mimicking, in some cases, symptoms of appendicitis4. Additionally, SARS-CoV-2 was detected by means
of electron microscopy in stool samples, elevated concentrations of SARS-CoV-2 RNA were detected in air
samples collected in patients’ toilet areas5 and rectal swabs from mildly symptomatic pediatric patients
persistently tested positive, even after viral clearance from the upper respiratory tract had occurred6. This
evidence, together with the recent demonstration of a high receptor density at the level of the oral cavity and
tongue7, raises important questions about the likelihood of fecal–oral transmission and whether therapeutic
interventions to reduce gastrointestinal infection will play a role in the control of the disease. However, a
recent report of 244 consecutive COVID-19 positive children from Wuhan did not find any difference in fecal
nucleic acid RT-PCR between children with or without GI symptoms, suggesting that RT-PCR detection of
the virus was not due to gut infection but coming instead from the respiratory tract from swallowed sputum8.
Defining the role of the GI tract in SARS-CoV-2 infection may also help understand the risks of vertical
transmission during gestation since amniotic fluid is swallowed by the fetus during gestation and viral
contamination has been isolated from the placenta of an affected woman9. While samples from affected
mothers have so far failed to prove that amniotic fluid, cord blood, and breast milk contain SARS-CoV-210,
very limited data are available at this stage for pregnant women with COVID-19, and even fewer data are
available on intrauterine vertical transmission11. While severe symptoms and death have been recorded in
infants as young as 10 months of age12, very few cases of pathology in neonates have been associated with
infection13 and when 6 newborns from infected mothers were screened for SARS-CoV-2, they tested negative
for the virus10. However, this limited cohort cannot exclude the possibility of infection of the fetuses.
Reliable human in vitro GI model systems that faithfully reproduce infection dynamics and disease
mechanisms will prove key to advance our understanding of SARS-CoV-2 replication and pathology in the
GI tract. Little information is available with respect to the distribution of the viral receptor angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ACE2) at the level of the GI tract of humans14. In particular, we lack fundamental
information regarding which region of the GI system is the target of replication and primarily associates with
the prolonged shedding of SARS-CoV-2 in both pediatric and adult patients. Organoids have attracted great
attention, enabling in vitro disease modeling and providing an ideal tool for studying infectious pathogens,
particularly of the GI tract15. Recent studies have demonstrated how SARS-CoV-2 can efficiently infect human
intestinal enteroids16,17, providing evidence in support of the hypothesis that sees SARS-CoV-2 as a fecaloral transmissible pathogen. However, it remains to be elucidated whether access to the duodenum depends
on passive transport of infected oral fluids across the stomach, or on active viral replication in the gastric
mucosa. Human gastric organoids derived from adult patients and induced pluripotent stem cells have proved
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

to be instrumental for the generation of reliable in vitro models for the characterization of infectious agents18,19.
Organoid derivation from human fetal organs has been shown for the intestine20, liver21 and pancreas22. Here,
we describe the novel derivation of proliferative progenitors from human fetal stomach and their expansion
in vitro as enterospheres. Furthermore, we provide insight into the ability of SARS-CoV-2 to infect an
organoid-based model of the gastric mucosa at both fetal and pediatric ages.
This work aims to unravel the susceptibility of the stomach to SARS-CoV-2 infection through the
development of an innovative expandable in vitro model that faithfully reproduces the gastric microenvironment. A deeper understanding of the susceptibility of the human stomach to SARS-CoV-2 infection
and replication could lay the foundations for the development of therapeutic options to reduce gastrointestinal
infection.

Results
Defined stages are present during early and late human gastric development
Organoids are organized three dimensional structures that can be grown from isolated stem cells
found in adult and fetal tissues. In order to derive a novel in vitro gastric model of fetal origin, we firstly
characterized the tissues isolated from human fetuses and compared them to gastric mucosa obtained from
pediatric patients undergoing surgery (Fig. 1a). Developing stomach structures are shown in Fig. 1b from
Carnegie stage (CS) 23 (corresponding to mid-week 8) to post conception week (PCW) 21. Gastric crypts
start to invaginate between PCW 11 and PCW 12 and form a clearly defined crypt at around PCW 20 (Fig.
1c). We characterized the appearance of gastric markers during fetal development. Mucin 5AC positive pit
mucous cells were evident at PCW 11, while pepsinogen C (marking chief cells) started to emerge at around
PCW 20 (Fig. 1d). Mucin 6, a gland mucous cell marker, was constitutively expressed from early week 8 (CS
20), together with enteroendocrine cells marked by chromogranin A that were present from mid-week 8 (CS
23) (Fig. 1e). We then defined three distinct groups of gastric epithelial tissues based on gland maturity: 1)
early fetal stomachs from PCW 8 to PCW 15; 2) late fetal stomachs from PCW 17 to PCW 21; 3) pediatric
stomachs. Real time quantitative PCR (qPCR) was performed on gastric tissues obtained from these three
groups to examine the gene expression changes of stem cell and differentiated cell markers. A significant
correlation between developmental stage and mRNA expression was observed for AXIN2, mucin 5AC
(MUC5AC), pepsinogen A5 (PGA5), with a similar trend for chromogranin A (CHGA) and ATPase H+/K+
transporting subunit beta (ATP4B) (Fig. 1f). On the other hand, expression of leucine-rich repeat-containing
G-protein coupled receptor 5 (LGR5) and somatostatin (SST) were significantly higher in the late fetal
stomachs.

Gastric organoids can be derived from human fetal and pediatric tissue
Following gastric tissue characterization, we efficiently extracted glandular crypts from fetal and
pediatric stomachs utilizing chelating buffers and mechanical stress. To improve compatibility with
subsequent clinical application of this organoid system, isolated fetal cells were expanded in a chemically
defined medium, without the use of animal serum or conditioned media. Each gastric cytokine, based on
previous work19 was screened and selectively removed from the organoids split to single cells and grown for
10 days to allow clonal organoid formation. While R-spondin 1,Wnt-3A and Noggin withdrawal led to more
differentiated morphology, CHIR99021 (GSK-3 inhibitor) proved to be essential in the formation of fetal gastric
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

organoids starting from single cells (Fig. 2a). No difference was found among fetal and pediatric organoid
growth in the medium. We then performed isolation of several gastric organoid lines (Supplementary Table
1). The isolation protocol proved to be highly efficient and we obtained a biobank composed of 5 lines of early
fetal stage (from CS23 to PCW 11), 6 lines of late fetal stage (from PCW 18 to PCW 21), and 4 lines of
pediatric stage organoids (from 4 months- to 11 years-old). Expanding organoids were stained for the
epithelial marker ezrin (EZR) and luminal polarized f-actin Fig. 2c. MUC5AC was present on the luminal side
of the organoids of all stages, with a relatively lower expression in the early PCW 11 (Fig. 2c). Organoids
were expanded and counted for several months, showing higher rate of expansion for earlier fetal stages
(Fig. 2d). No plateau was reached in any of the curves even after several months, showing the possibility to
obtain stable fetal gastric organoid lines (Supplementary Fig. 1). After weekly passaging for more than 10
weeks, we further characterized the organoid lines to evaluate genomic stability. Single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) arrays on early fetal, late fetal and pediatric organoids showed no chromosomal
duplications, no large deletions, nor other karyotype aberrations, demonstrating the organoids are genetically
stable after prolonged in vitro culture (Fig. 2e). Real time PCR was performed on organoids grouped in early
fetal (CS 23 to PCW 11), late fetal (PCW 18 to PCW 20) and pediatric. Stem cell crypt markers LGR5 and
AXIN2 were expressed in these organoids, indicating the presence of proliferating cells. MUC5AC showed a
pattern of increased expression along differentiation comparable to the tissue of origin in Fig. 1f. The
expression patterns of MUC6 and SST were also comparable to the tissue of origin. On the other hand,
CHGA showed an inverted pattern of expression, while transcript expression of proton pump transporter
ATP4B, responsible for gastric acid secretion, was lost in the organoid model (Fig. 2f).

Gastric organoids preserve some transcriptional features of the tissues of origin
Next, we characterized the transcriptomics of gastric epithelial tissues and gastric-derived organoids,
at three developmental stages. RNA-seq was performed on the three groups of early fetal, late fetal and
pediatric samples. Principal component analysis (PCA) showed smaller heterogeneity in the organoid groups
derived at different stages of fetal and pediatric development with respect to the primary tissues analyzed at
the same stages, which may also include some heterogeneity from the surrounding cells as a result of the
isolation procedure (Fig. 3a). When PCA was performed including only organoid samples, the overall
variability due to the different developmental stage was comparable to that between biological replicates
within the same group (Supplementary Fig. 2a). This analysis suggests that transcriptional differences related
to the developmental stage of the tissue of origin could be more subtle than those captured at PCA level. We
then analyzed the expression of typical gastric markers in organoids derived from tissues at different stages23.
The only differentially expressed gene (DEG) was MUC5AC, which was more highly expressed in organoids
from tissues at later developmental stages (Fig. 3b), confirming the qPCR results above (Fig. 2f). We did not
observe processes of "intestinalization" of the organoids in culture, as CDX2 expression was negligible
(Supplementary Fig. 2c). Consistent with the qPCR results in Fig. 2f, expression of ATP4A and ATP4B proton
transporters were not detectable in the RNA-seq, confirming the absence of the parietal cells in the organoids
(Supplementary Fig. 2d). On the other hand, most putative genes identifying gastric crypt stem cells (SOX9,
OLFM4, PROCR, MKI67, TACSTD2) were expressed at all developmental stages (Supplementary Fig. 2e).
RNA-seq analysis on the gastric primary tissues showed a significant increase in transcript levels of the
functional markers along the developmental stage (Fig. 3c), confirming that the temporal trend shown by PCA
(Fig. 3a) is related to specific gastric developmental stages. When we performed hierarchical clustering
analyses of the previously reported genes representing the six stomach cellular subtypes23, most of these
genes from the analysis were not DEGs (Fig. 3d). Indeed, these six cell types are known to be all co-present
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

at different stages of embryo development from PCW 7 to 2523. Furthermore, we clustered DEGs between
pair of conditions to reproduce a pseudo-temporal profile between the three developmental stages
considered (Fig. 3e). We highlighted in Fig. 3f the results of a pathway enrichment analysis from selected
clusters that displayed gastric-related functions. Full results are reported in (Supplementary File 1).

Reversed polarity in organoids facilitates expression of ACE2 on the external surface
In order to validate both fetal and pediatric gastric organoids as functional in vitro models of SARSCoV-2 infection and replication, we optimized the culture condition for viral infection in a 3D system (Fig. 4a).
Standard organoids of endodermal organs have a luminal polarity facing the internal portion of the structure,
with an apical (inner) f-actin and zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1), and basal (external) lamina marked by b-4
integrin (b4-INT) (Fig. 4b). Such inner polarity might be an obstacle to an efficient viral infection in vitro, given
that the apical side is luminal. In addition, Matrigel might impede efficient diffusion of the virus, thus affecting
the likelihood of establishing an infection, and subsequent detection and quantification of the viral progeny
released from the infected organoids. To maximize the efficiency of infection and the effective quantification
of viral progeny released, we reverted the polarity of the gastric organoids24 to expose the apical side of the
cells on the outer side. Organoids were removed from the surrounding extracellular matrix and cultured in
suspension for 3 days, resulting in the exposure of the apical f-actin on the outer side, accompanied with
MUC5AC secretion externally (Fig. 4c). Conversely, ZO-1 and b4-INT expression was inverted compared to
standard organoids in Fig. 4b. Full 3D deconvolution images of reversed organoids are shown in
Supplementary Fig. 3a.
We then analyzed the absolute expression of ACE2 and transmembrane protease serine 2
(TMPRSS2) SARS-CoV-2 receptors in our gastric models to evaluate the SARS-CoV-2 infection potential.
RNA-seq data analysis showed that expression of ACE2 was significantly lower in early fetal stomachs
compared to the pediatric ones, while late fetal samples' higher variability prevents drawing a final conclusion.
On the other hand, TMPRSS2 mRNA expression was consistently high throughout the stomach samples
(Fig. 4d). We further performed RNA sequencing on RP-GOs to evaluate the transcriptional changes. PCA
analysis showed similar clustering among the different stages between RP-GOs (Supplementary Fig. 3b) and
normal polarity organoids (Supplementary Fig. 2a). A comparable pattern of expression for ACE2 and
TMPRSS2 was observed also in RP-GOs, with ACE2 significantly higher expressed in pediatric organoids
(Fig. 4e). Protein expression of ACE2 was further confirmed by immunofluorescence staining in all the RPGOs derived at PCW11, PCW 20 and pediatric stages (Fig. 4f).

Pediatric gastric organoids are more susceptible than fetal organoids to SARS-CoV-2 infection
To investigate the susceptibility of organoids to SARS-CoV-2 infection, we selected a SARS-CoV-2
isolate obtained from the pharyngeal swab of a 14-year-old pediatric patient. Purity of the isolate was
confirmed by means of molecular testing comprising an extended panel of bacterial and viral respiratory
agents. Reversed-polarity gastric organoids derived at PCW11, PCW 20 and pediatric stages and normalpolarity organoids from the same stages were infected by trained virologists in a biosafety level 3 (BSL3)
laboratory. After a 2-hour infection, the organoids were cultured up to 96 hours in suspension and checked
for structural integrity and viability by visual examination on a daily basis (Fig. 5a). Vero E6 cells were used
as a susceptible substrate for SARS-CoV-2, to validate the infection in vitro (Supplementary Fig. 4a). In
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

normal-polarity gastric organoids embedded in Matrigel, SARS-CoV-2, established an infection as
demonstrated by the presence of viral double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) in the cytosolic compartment of cells
(Supplementary Fig. 4b-c), nevertheless titration of the culture supernatants by FFA failed to detect viable
virus at any time after infection.
On the other hand, RP-GOs infected and cultured in suspension showed a consistent level of viral
infection among organoids, as demonstrated by immunofluorescence staining of coronavirus nucleoprotein
(NP CoV) and dsRNA (Fig. 5b and Supplementary Fig. 4d). Interestingly, both NP CoV and dsRNA were
detected in the same cells as cleaved caspase 3 (CCAS3), meaning that SARS-CoV-2 infected gastric cells
undergo programmed cell death (apoptosis), as shown in Fig. 5c. We then analyzed the level of SARS-CoV2 replication in fetal and pediatric reverse-polarity organoids, after 0, 24, 48, 72 and 96 hours post-infection.
Fig. 5d shows the yield of live virus in the culture supernatant, titrated by focus forming assay (FFA) on Vero
E6 cells. These data demonstrated that the level of SARS-CoV-2 infection and the subsequent replication
increased with the developmental stages of the gastric organoids, reaching in the pediatric RP-GOs peak
titers of 104 FFU/ml at 72 hours post-infection.

SARS-CoV-2 infection induces a moderate antiviral state in late fetal and pediatric organoids
Next, we performed RNA-seq analysis on non-infected and infected organoids samples at each
developmental stage. Interestingly, we identified significantly DEGs in samples from PCW 20 (19 DEGs) and
pediatric organoids (13 DEGs), but not in PCW11 samples (Fig. 6a). All the DEGs in both developmental
stages were up-regulated after the infection, among which 10 genes (CMPK2, DDX58, DHX58, HERC5,
IFI44, IFIT2, IFIT3, IRF7, MX1, RSAD2) were in common. We further performed an analysis to find the DEGs
associated with the infection irrespective of the developmental stage, identifying a further 8 DEGs (BST2,
EIF2AK2, HERC6, IFI44L, LAMP3, SLC1A3, STAT1, USP18), for an overall number of DEGs equal to 30.
Intriguingly, approximately 63% of the DEGs identified in this study as respondent to the infection were
previously found to be DEGs in a literature survey of transcriptomic data on SARS-CoV, where 38 genes
were identified as DEGs at the intersection of at least 9 studies (Fig. 6b). Among the common DEGs, some
were first responders of the infection process, like the DDX58 and IFIH1 encoding the viral RNA sensors
RIG-I and MDA5 respectively, and their regulators, such as DHX58; others more downstream players of the
response, such as OAS2 that is activated by detection of dsRNA to inhibit viral replication, IFIT2 that inhibits
the expression of viral mRNAs, and BST2 that limits viral secretion. All the 30 DEGs identified in this study,
except SLC1A3, showed an up-regulation in response to the infection in samples from PCW 20 and the
pediatric patient (Fig. 6c). IFI44L showed the highest fold change both in PCW 20 and in pediatric samples.
This gene was previously found to be a marker of viral infection compared with to bacterial infection25 and
more recently described as a negative modulator of innate immune responses induced after virus infections26.
Type I, II and III interferon (IFN) transcripts were not differentially expressed between non-infected and
infected RP-GOs.
We then performed an enrichment analysis within the Reactome database to understand the
functional implications of the DEGs up-regulation after the infection in PCW20 and pediatric samples (Fig.
6d). Interestingly, the majority of DEGs fell within pathways associated with the innate response to viral
infection, particularly those involved in the regulation of type I IFN alpha/beta by cytoplasmic patternrecognition receptors (PRRs) such as RIG-I and MDA5, and the expression of IFN stimulated genes (ISGs).
Moreover, to capture more subtle differences between non-infected and infected samples that do not emerge
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

in the DEG analysis, we performed a Quantitative Set Analysis for Gene Expression (QuSAGE)27 within the
Gene Ontology database (Supplementary File 2). Categories related to the IFN response to the infection
were identified in all three sample groups (PCW11, PCW20, and pediatric), other categories were reported
for completeness, but require further studies to understand their relevance.

Discussion
Reliable in vitro models capable of reproducing complex in vivo systems are becoming increasingly
important in life sciences and play a crucial role in the investigation of emerging pathogens of devastating
sanitary and economic impact like SARS-CoV-2. In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is still unclear
how gastrointestinal virus replication might affect the clinical outcome of infection, the development of
immunity and the transmission dynamics in the population. While it has been shown that SARS-CoV-2 is
frequently detected in rectal samples of affected children and adults, it remains to be determined if the virus
is able to produce a primary infection throughout the entire GI tract, or if its presence could be related in part
to a passive transport of contaminated sputum coming from the upper respiratory tract. Most importantly, the
ability of SARS-CoV-2 to persist in the GI tract after respiratory clearance, has not yet been fully elucidated
in terms of viral infectivity, possibly impairing important public health and policy measures for the control of
the disease. These concerns are particularly relevant in children who appear on average to suffer a less
severe respiratory illness compared to adults, despite recording more prominent GI symptoms with clinical
pictures mimicking appendicitis28, a hyperinflammatory shock syndrome (Paediatric Multisystem
Inflammatory Syndrome – Temporally Associated with SARS-CoV-2, PIMS-TS)29, or acting as relatively
asymptomatic carriers of the virus. Those risks have prompted clinical guidelines recommending the
avoidance of aerosol producing procedures, including upper GI endoscopies, in children with confirmed or
suspected COVID-19 for the safety of frontline clinical staff and other patients. Susceptibility of the different
portions of the GI tract to SARS-CoV-2 infection has not been fully characterized and due to a paucity of
autopsy reports targeting the gastric compartment2, the capacity of SARS-CoV-2 to infect the gastric mucosa
is still unclear.
Two recent studies show that the SARS-CoV-2 receptor angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is
highly expressed on differentiated enterocytes and that intestinal organoids derived from the small intestine
can be easily infected by SARS-CoV-216,17. Interestingly, intestinal organoids derived from both human and
horseshoe bats are fully susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection and sustain robust viral replication. Although
vertical transmission of SARS-CoV-2 seems to be anecdotal, it is still unclear if this lack of infection relates
to the inability of the virus to migrate through the placenta30, to the low susceptibility of the fetal cells to
infection, or simply on low viremic loads. Whereas human fetal intestinal organoids have already been
reported20, a reliable 3D culture in vitro model of human gastric mucosa at different developmental stages
has been challenging to achieve.
In this study, we describe successful derivation of human gastric organoids from both fetal and
pediatric samples and we demonstrate that gastric cells are susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Furthermore, we describe how a reversed-polarity organoid model can help expose the apical domains, in
direct contact with the surrounding microenvironment, so that pathogens can easily access surface receptors
on the cells. Past studies showed laborious pathogen infection in human gastric organoids by microinjection
of Helicobacter pylori solution into the lumen of each organoid18,19. Other studies showed disruption of 3D
organoid organization in favor of a 2D monolayer culture to overcome inner polarity problems in H. pylori
infection31. Recently, in SARS-CoV-2 infection studies, intestinal organoid 3D structures were sheared to
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

expose the apical viral receptors and then reaggregated in ECM hydrogel droplets16,17. In these studies,
infection of organoids upon shearing and embedding was attained, as proved by the immunofluorescent
staining of viral antigens and detection of viral RNA. However, release of the infectious progeny in the culture
supernatants differed greatly, ranging from positive titers of around 101-2 Tissue Culture Infectious Dose 50%
(TCID50)/mL16 to 104-5 TCID50/mL17. Such discrepancy could depend on multiple factors, but we believe that
the laborious nature of this approach might increase inter-operator and inter-laboratory variability, resulting
in the generation of less-reproducible data. To overcome these complications, we decided to prevent the
system perturbation and infect human gastric organoids under steady-state conditions. Taking advantage of
a polarity reversion study24, we generated fetal and pediatric cultures of RP-GOs in suspension. In this
condition of exposed apical polarity and absence of surrounding Matrigel, we could infect organoids and
readily titrate the infectivity of the progeny virus, recording infection level comparable to those shown by Zhou
et al.17, taking into account an FFU-to-TCID50 conversion factor of 0.28 (data not shown, from previous
validation of assays). Interestingly, when we infected gastric organoids through shearing and re-embedding
in Matrigel, infection was achieved but failed to detect virus in the supernatants, indicating this approach as
suboptimal for our purposes.
We demonstrated that the RP-GOs are fully susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection, with an efficiency
of replication that correlates directly with the developmental stage of origin. Quantification of gene transcripts
coding for the viral receptors ACE2 and TMPRSS2 suggested that the observed levels of replication are not
dependent on difference in the density of receptors, given their statistically comparable expression across
the three stages. Nonetheless, variation in the protein-to-mRNA ratio across organoids of different
developmental stage should be taken into account and receptivity investigated in future work.
Immunofluorescence staining for the nucleocapsid indicated a clear cytosolic localization of this protein that
in some cells was associated with the presence of the cleaved caspase 3, confirming the occurrence of
apoptosis in the GI compartment16. Apoptosis in infected GI mucosal cells might account at least in part for
the frequent abdominal pain, vomit and diarrhea described in COVID-19 patients32, in particular in pediatric
populations. Apoptosis is one of the key mechanisms of cells to restrict viral infections by destruction of the
cellular machinery indispensable for virus replication; on the other hand, selected viruses have evolved
diverse adaptative strategies to control this phenomenon in their favor33. To this respect, SARS-CoV was
shown to replicate in vitro to high titers in cells undergoing apoptosis and to low titers in cells where cytopathic
effect was limited and a persistent infection was established34. Interestingly, induction of apoptosis for SARSCoV was proved to be caused by a nuclear localization of the nucleocapsid protein that in turn resulted in its
cleavage by caspases 6 and 3. The precise mechanism underpinning nucleocapsid cleaving, apoptosis and
the replication efficiency of SARS-CoV remains unexplored. We reckon that similar mechanistic studies are
of great interest to decipher the pathology of SARS-CoV-2 in the GI system and its implications on virus
shedding and transmissibility.
RP-GO of late fetal and pediatric age infected with SARS-CoV-2 shared a transcriptional footprint
surprisingly similar to those described for infected human small intestine enteroids16,17 in which type I IFN
genes were either poorly expressed or undetectable, despite enterocytes and gastric cells displaying
moderate levels of ISGs primarily involved in the recognition of viral RNA. Moreover, our transcriptional data
are in considerable agreement with clinical and experimental profiles derived from COVID-19 patients,
infected normal human bronchial epithelial cells and in vivo studies in ferrets35 that highlighted a negligible
expression of genes of the IFN family but a robust expression of chemokines and ISGs. Our data provide
novel evidence in support of the hypothesis that pathogenesis of COVID-19 is at least in part dependent on
a reduced innate antiviral response and an unbalanced cytokine production. Nevertheless, in our model
chemokines were not differentially expressed, whereas in small intestine organoids, Zhou et al17 reported
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

DEGs coding both chemokine receptors and ligands. Since we conducted a bulk RNA-seq analysis and the
number of infected cells in our organoids were still a minority, we speculate that many processes specific of
infected cells, most likely did not reach a statistically significance level and might have gone undetected,
hence imposing a cautionary approach in our interpretation of data. Interestingly, a large overlap of DEGs
with previous transcriptomic studies of SARS-CoV infection was found, including the peculiar feature of a
limited/absent type I IFN induction and the recruitment of a subset of cytoplasmic PRRs. Similarly to SARSCoV, in which ORF3B and ORF6 are the main antagonists of IFN, a recent study currently under peerrevision36 indicates the SARS-CoV-2 ORF3B protein as a potent IFN inhibitor, supporting ours and the
published transcriptomic data herein discussed.
Conclusions
Our gastric organoid system offers a unique tool to characterize the replication of viruses and some
of the associated pathological consequences of infection. This innovative model could represent an in vitro
scalable platform for the development and testing of antiviral drug candidates targeting the GI system. A
deeper understanding of the pathogenic mechanism underpinning the viral colonization of the GI system will
potentially expand the available therapeutic options for the inhibition and preventing of GI infection, in an
attempt to suppress viral shedding and halt spreading of the disease. The clinical importance of our findings
relates to the worrisome phenomenon of prolonged shedding of SARS-CoV-2 from the GI tract and calls for
further research to assess the risk of vertical transmission in infected women. Defining the susceptible age
and the target anatomical sites will prove of crucial importance for the implementation of sensitive and
sustainable diagnostic screening for the identification of contagious asymptomatic patients.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Methods
Isolation of human fetal and pediatric gastric stem cells
Human fetal stomachs were dissected from tissue obtained immediately after termination of
pregnancy from 8 to 21 PCW (post conception week), in compliance with the bioethics legislation in the UK.
Fetal samples were sourced via the Joint MRC/Wellcome Trust Human Developmental Biology Resource
under informed ethical consent with Research Tissue Bank ethical approval (08/H0712/34+5).
Human pediatric gastric surgical biopsies were collected after informed consent, in compliance with
all relevant ethical regulations for work with human participants, following the guidelines of the licenses
08ND13 and 18DS02.
Fetal stomachs and pediatric biopsies were collected in ice-cold sterile phosphate buffered solution
(PBS – Sigma-Aldrich) and processed within a few hours of collection. Gastric crypt stem cells were isolated
from specimens following a well-established dissociation protocol19. Briefly, fetal stomachs where cut open
longitudinally along the lesser curvature, while @ 0.5 cm2 pediatric biopsies where processed as they were
obtained. Specimens were cold-washed in a plate with chelating buffer (sterile Milli-Q water (Merck Millipore)
with 5.6 mmol/L Na2HPO4, 8.0 mmol/L KH2PO4, 96.2 mmol/L NaCl, 1.6 mmol/L KCl, 43.4 mmol/L sucrose,
54.9 mmol/L D- sorbitol, 0.5 mmol/L DL-dithiothreitol, pH 7, all from Sigma-Aldrich). Mucus was removed with
a glass coverslip and mucosa was stripped from muscle layer. Tissue was cut in small pieces, transferred in
a 15 mL tube in new chelating buffer and pipetted repeatedly. Supernatant was discarded and 10 mL of 10
mM EDTA was added and incubated for 10 min at room temperature. EDTA was discarded and mucosa
pieces were washed in ice cold PBS with Ca2+/Mg2+ (Sigma-Aldrich). Tissue was transferred to a new 10 cm
plate on ice and pressure was applied on top with a sterile 3.5 cm plate, to release the crypts from the mucosa.
Crypts were collected in ice-cold ADMEM+++, composed of Advanced DMEM F-12, 10 mM HEPES, 2 mM
Glutamax, 1% Pen/Strep (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Medium with glands was filtered through a 40
µm strainer and centrifuged at 300 g for 5 min at 4°C. Supernatant was discarded and ice cold liquid Matrigel®
Basement Membrane Matrix Growth Factor Reduced (GFR) (Corning 354230) was added to the pellet and
thoroughly resuspended. Droplets of 30 µL were aliquoted on warmed multi-well plates and incubated for 20
min at 37°C for gelation. Medium was added and changed every 3 days. For medium recipes refer to
Supplementary Table 2.

Passage of organoids
Cell were passaged every 6-8 days. To passage the organoids, Matrigel droplets were disrupted by
pipetting in the well and transferred to tubes on ice. Cells were washed with 10 mL of cold basal ADMEM+++
and centrifuged at 200 g at 4°C. (First method) For single cell dissociation, supernatant was discarded, and
the pellet resuspended in 1 mL of TrypLE (Thermo Fisher) and incubated for 5 min. After incubation organoids
were disaggregated by pipetting, and 10 mL of ice-cold ADMEM+++ was added to dilute and inhibit TrypLE.
(Second method) For standard organoid passage during expansion, the organoid pellet was resuspended in
1.5 mL of ice-cold ADMEM+++ and organoids were manually disrupted by narrowed (flamed) glass pipette
pre-coated in BSA 1% in PBS, to avoid adhesion to the glass. Cells were washed, pelleted and supernatant
discarded. Almost-dry pellets of disaggregated organoids (or single cells) were thoroughly resuspended in
cold liquid Matrigel, aliquoted in 30 µL droplets in pre-warmed multi-well plates and incubated at 37°C for 20
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

min to form a gel. Rho-kinase inhibitor (Tocris) was added to single cell dissociated organoids. Medium was
added and changed every 3 days.

Polarity reversion
Fully grown gastric organoids at day 7 after single cell disaggregation were removed from surrounding
extracellular matrix using a modified published protocol24. Matrigel was dissolved with 60 min treatment of
the droplets with Cell Recovery Solution (Corning) at 4°C. Organoids were retrieved from the plates using
1% BSA-coated cut-end tips and transferred to 1% BSA-coated 15 mL tubes. Cells were extensively washed
with ice-cold PBS and centrifuged at 200 g for 5 min at 4°C. Supernatant was discarded, the pellet was
resuspended in complete medium and transferred to non-tissue culture treated low-adhesive multiwell plates
(pre-coated in 1% BSA). Organoids were cultured in suspension for 3 days to allow reversion of polarity,
before use in infection experiments.

DNA isolation and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis
Full grown 7 days-old organoids from passages 11 to 16 were washed from Matrigel with ice-cold
PBS and DNA was extracted using DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (Qiagen), following manufacturer’s
instructions. DNA in water was analyzed using 8 µL volume at 75 ng/µl concentration per sample. Single
Nucleotide Polymorphism array Infinium Core-24 v1.1 Kit (Illumina) was used according to manufacturer’s
instructions. Results were analyzed through GenomeStudio software (Illumina). We exported representative
images of the chromosome viewer/B allele frequency, for each analyzed sample.

RNA isolation
For RNA isolation from stomach tissues, i) pediatric stomach biopsies consisted of only mucosal layer
from surgical samples; ii) Late fetal stomachs were cut open and mucosal layer was isolated; iii) early fetal
stomachs were processed with no layer isolation, given the small size of the samples. Mucus was removed
from all the samples with a glass coverslip to prevent RNA loss during the isolation protocol, and tissues
washed in ice-cold PBS. Then the tissues were finely cut with a scalpel on a Petri-dish on ice and transferred
to 1.5 mL tubes.
RNA was isolated from cultured organoids in Matrigel with 30 min treatment of the droplets with Cell
Recovery Solution (Corning) at 4°C. Cells were then washed in ice cold PBS to remove matrix leftovers that
could interfere with RNA isolation. Organoids were centrifuged at 200 g at 4°C and supernatant discarded.
Dry pellets of tissues and organoids were lysed with RLT buffer (Qiagen). RNA was isolated with
RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) following manufacturer’s instructions. Total RNA was quantified using the Qubit
2.0 fluorimetric Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

Real Time PCR
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

RNA reverse transcription was performed using the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit
(Thermo Fisher), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Reverse transcription was done using the
T100 thermal cycler (Bio-Rad). The qRT-PCR was performed with TaqMan gene expression assay probes
(Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The following probes (all from Thermo Fisher)
were used: GAPDH (glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase), LGR5 (leucine-rich repeat-containing Gprotein coupled receptor 5), AXIN2 (axin-like protein), MUC5AC (mucin 5AC), MUC6 (mucin 6), PGA5
(pepsinogen A5), SST (somatostatin), GAST (gastrin), CHGA (chromogranin A), ATP4B (ATPase H+/K+
transporting subunit beta). Reactions were performed on Step One Plus Real-Time PCR System (Applied
Biosystems) and results were analyzed with StepOne (Version 2.3) software (Life Technologies). GAPDH
expression was used to normalize Ct values for gene expression, and data were shown as relative fold
change to controls (early fetal stage), using ∆∆Ct method, and presented as Mean ± SEM.

RNA Seq and transcriptome bioinformatic analyses
For RNA-seq data of original tissues and organoids with spontaneous polarity, total RNA (100 ng)
from each sample was prepared using QuantSeq 3' mRNA-Seq Library prep kit (Lexogen GmbH) according
to manufacturer's instructions. The amplified fragmented cDNA of 300 bp in size were sequenced in singleend mode using the Nova Seq 6000 (Illumina) with a read length of 100 bp. Illumina novaSeq base call (BCL)
files were converted into fastq files through bcl2fastq (version v2.20.0.422) following software guide.
Sequence reads were trimmed using bbduk software (bbmap suite 37.31), following software guide, to
remove adapter sequences, poly-A tails and low-quality end bases (regions with average quality below 6).
Alignment was performed with STAR 2.6.0a37 on hg38 reference assembly obtained from cellRanger website
(Ensembl 93), following online site guide. The expression levels of genes were determined with htseq-count
0.9.1 by using cellRanger pre-build genes annotations (Ensembl Assembly 93). All transcripts having <1 CPM
in less than 4 samples and percentage of multimap alignment reads > 20% simultaneously were filtered out.
For RNA-seq data of non-infected and infected RP-GOs, A total of 600 pg of RNA was used as input
for the synthesis of cDNA with the SMART-Seq v4 Ultra Low Input RNA Kit for Sequencing (Takara Bio USA,
Mountain View, CA, USA). Manufacturer suggested protocol was followed, with minor modifications. 75 pg
of DNA generated with SMART-Seq v4 Kit were used for preparation of library with NEXTERA XT DNA
Library Preparation kit (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA), following suggested protocol. Libraries were
sequenced in pair-end mode using a Nova Seq 6000 sequencing system on an SP, 100 cycles flow cell
(Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). Illumina novaSeq base call (BCL) files were converted into fastq files
through bcl2fastq (version v2.20.0.422) following software guide. Alignment was performed with STAR
2.6.0a34 on hg38 reference assembly obtained from the Gencode website (primary assembly v. 32).
Transcripts estimated counts were determined with RSEM 1.3.038 by using the Gencode v.32 genes
annotations. All genes having <1 CPM in less than 2 replicates of the same condition were filtered out.
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were computed with edgeR39, using a mixed criterion based
on p-value, after false discovery rate (FDR) correction by Benjamini-Hochberg method, lower than 0.05 and
absolute log2(fold change) higher than log2(1.5). This analysis was paired between non-infected and
infected samples derived from the same original sample. For RNA-seq data of organoids with spontaneous
polarity, DEGs were clustered according to a flat, increasing, or decreasing profile according to the differential
expression analysis between pairs of time points. Principal Component Analysis was performed by Singular
Value Decomposition (SVD) on log2(CPM+1) data, after centering, using MATLAB R2017a (The
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

MathWorks). DEGs over-representation analysis of Gene Ontology (GO) and Reactome categories was
performed using ClueGO (version 2.5.4)40. Reactome hierarchy was visualized using ClueGO within
Cytoscape41. Hierarchical clustering of DEGs was performed on median-centered log2(CPM+1) data in
MATLAB, using Euclidean distance and complete linkage. Log-normalized expression data were analyzed
by the Quantitative Set Analysis for Gene Expression (QuSAGE)27 Bioconductor package.

Virus isolation and cell lines
Vero E6 cells (ATCC® CRL 1586™) were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM, Thermo Fisher) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS), penicillin (100 U/ml) and
streptomycin (100U/ml) (all from Thermo Fisher) at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO2 incubator. The SARS-CoV2 isolate was obtained from a nasopharyngeal swab collected from a 14-year-old boy in Italy. Briefly, the
swab viral transport medium was filtered through a 0.22 µm filter, serially diluted and incubated onto a
confluent layer of Vero E6 cells, for 5 days. To ensure purity of the viral isolate, the supernatant of the highest
dilution in which cytopathic effect was visible was tested for the presence of 21 human respiratory pathogens
including SARS-CoV-2, using the QIAstat-Dx Respiratory SARS-CoV-2 Panel (Qiagen). Viral stocks were
produced infecting at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1 Vero E6 cells cultured in DMEM supplemented with
2% FCS, penicillin (100 U/ml) and streptomycin (100U/ml) and incubating the cells for 48 hours. Supernatants
were collected when 80% cells exhibited cytopathic effect and cleared by low- speed centrifugation before
being stored at -80°C. All infections in this paper were performed using the third culture passage of the
original isolate.

Infection of reverse-polarity organoids in suspension
Intact organoids were embedded in two 3 µl-drops of Matrigel per well, in 24-well plates. Embedded
organoids were washed once in DMEM and infected at a MOI of 0.5 by incubation with 250 µl of an expansion
medium viral suspension for 2 hours. After removal of the inoculum, organoids were washed twice with a
DMEM solution and 400 µl of complete medium were added to each well to maintain the culture at 37 °C with
5% CO2. Reversed-polarity organoids were infected at a MOI of 1 by incubation with 250 µl of an expansion
medium viral suspension for 2 hours. After infection, organoids were washed twice in DMEM to remove
unbound virus. RP-GOs were dispersed in a 400 µl expansion medium at 37 °C with 5% CO2. For all organoid
cultures 50 µl of supernatant were harvested at 0, 24, 48, and 72 hours post infection. An equal volume of
expansion medium replaced the sampled supernatant at each collection time. An extra sample at 96 hours
post infection was collected for the RP-GOs. Samples were stored at -80°C before titration through the FFA.

Virus titration by focus forming assay (FFA)
Supernatants of organoid cultures and aliquots of viral stocks were serially diluted and incubated on
confluent monolayers of Vero E6 cells, in 96-well plates, for 1 hour. Culture medium formulation was the
same used for virus propagation. After infection, the inoculum was removed and an overlay of MEM, 2%
FBS, penicillin (100 U/ml) and streptomycin (100U/ml) and 0.8% carboxy methyl cellulose was added. After
27 hours, the overlay medium was removed and cells were fixed in a 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) phosphate
buffered solution (PBS), for 30 minutes at 4°C. Upon removal, cells were permeabilized by incubation with a
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0.5 % Triton X-100 solution for 10 minutes. Immunostaining of infected cells was performed by incubation of
the J2 anti-dsRNA monoclonal antibody (1:10,000; Scicons) for 1 hour, followed by 1-hour incubation with
peroxidase-labeled goat anti-mouse antibodies (1:1000; DAKO) and a 7 min incubation with the True Blue™
(KPL) peroxidase substrate. Solution of 1% bovine serum albumin and 0.05% Tween-80 in PBS was used
for the preparation of working dilutions of immuno-reagents. After each antibody incubation, cells were
washed 4 times through a 5 min incubation with a 0.05% Tween-80 PBS solution. Focus forming units (FFU)
were counted after acquisition of pictures at a high resolution of 4800 x 9400dpi, on a flatbed scanner.

Staining and immunofluorescence
Human gastric tissues were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA – Sigma-Aldrich) for 2 hours and
embedded in paraffin wax, then cut at 7 µm on a microtome. Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) tissue slides were
stained according to manufacturer’s instructions with Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) (Thermo Fisher).
Cultured organoids were removed from Matrigel with 30 min treatment of the droplets with Cell
Recovery Solution at 4°C. RP-GOs were fixed in suspension by transferring them to 1% BSA pre-coated 1.5
mL tubes, centrifuging and resuspension in 4% PFA for 20 min in rotation. PFA was discarded and quenched
with 0.1M NH4Cl for 1 h in rotation. Matrigel droplets (3 µL on glass slides) with embedded organoids were
fixed in 2% PFA for 20 min at RT, and then washed.
Immunostaining was performed by blocking and permeabilizing the tissue slides with PBS + Triton X100 0.1% with BSA 0.5%. Organoid whole-mounts were blocked and permeabilized with PBS + Triton X-100
0.5% with BSA 1% for 2 h at room temperature in rotation. Primary antibodies were incubated in blocking
buffer for 24h at 4°C in rotation and extensively washed in PBS + Triton X-100 0.1%. Secondary antibodies
were incubated overnight at 4°C in rotation and extensively washed. Slides were mounted in mounting
medium, while floating organoids were moved to a glass-bottomed Petri dish and blocked with a coverslip on
top. The full list of primary and secondary antibodies is presented in Supplementary table 3.

Image acquisition
Organoids were imaged in bright field using a Zeiss Axio Observer A1. Immunofluorescence images
of whole-mount staining and sections were acquired on a confocal microscope Zeiss LSM 710. Infected
organoid immunofluorescence images were acquired on a Leica TCS SP5.

Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using the following software: MATLAB (v. R2017a) for PCA, pie
plot, bar plot, hierarchical clustering with proteomic and RNA-seq data. GraphPad Prism Mac (v. 6.0h) was
used with all other graphs and charts.

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Financial support and acknowledgments
This research was funded by the OAK Foundation Award W1095/OCAY-14-191, the Fondazione
Cariparo “Progetti di Ricerca su Covid-19”, and the Horizon 2020 grant INTENS 668294. GGG is supported
by the NIHR GOSH BRC Catalyst Fellowship. BCJ is supported by the General Sir John Monash Foundation,
Australia. DC is supported by Fondazione Telethon Core Grant, Armenise-Harvard Foundation Career
Development Award, European Research Council (grant agreement 759154, CellKarma), and the Rita-Levi
Montalcini program from MIUR and POR FESR Campania 2014-2020. NE is supported by 2018 STARS-WiC
grant of University of Padova, Progetti di Eccellenza Cariparo, TWINING of University of Padova, Oak
Foundation Award (Grant No. W1095/OCAY-14-191). PDC is supported by NIHR Professorship and the
GOSH Children’s Charity. This research was supported by the NIHR GOSH BRC. The views expressed are
those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health. This
work was supported by ShanghaiTech University. We would like to thank the Human Developmental Biology
Resource (HDBR).We would like to thank Martin Sidler for his help in the collection of 3 pediatric gastric
samples for analysis, and Dr Gemma Molyneux and Pei Shi Chia with their assistance with sample
collections.

Author contributions
GGG, FB, NE and PDC designed the study. GGG, NE and PDC wrote the manuscript. GGG
performed the main experiments on organoid cultures. EZ characterized the fetal stomachs and derived the
fetal organoids. BCJ helped in organoid characterization. FB, OG and NE designed the infection experiments.
OG setup organoid culture and characterization for infection experiments. SP characterized the fetal
stomachs and helped in fetal organoid derivation and expansion. FB, MP, AB and EM performed infection
experiments. Ca.L performed all transcriptomic bioinformatics analyses. Ce.L and HS performed
immunofluorescence analysis on infected samples. AP helped in experimental setup. DC, AM, CC and LDF
performed RNA-seq and read alignments. VSWL and SE helped in experimental and manuscript discussion.
NT provided HDBR license. GGG, FB, NE and PDC critically discussed the data and manuscript. All authors
contributed to the final version of the manuscript.

Competing interests
DC is founder, shareholder, and consultant of Next Generation Diagnostic srl. All the other authors of
the study declare that they do not have anything to disclose regarding funding or conflict of interest with
respect to this manuscript.

Data availability
The authors declare that all data supporting the findings of this study are available within the article,
its Supplementary Information, attached files, and online deposited data (Gastric RNA-seq data: GSE_xxxx,
it will be deposited during revision), or from the authors upon reasonable request.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Bibliography

1.

Wölfel, R. et al. Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID-2019. Nature 1–5 (2020).
doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2196-x

2.

Xiao, F. et al. Evidence for Gastrointestinal Infection of SARS-CoV-2. Gastroenterology 158, 1831-1833.e3
(2020).

3.

Y, W. et al. Prolonged Presence of SARS-CoV-2 Viral RNA in Faecal Samples. lancet. Gastroenterol. Hepatol.
5, (2020).

4.

Tullie, L. et al. Gastrointestinal features in children with COVID-19: an observation of varied presentation in eight
children. Lancet. Child Adolesc. Heal. (2020). doi:10.1016/S2352-4642(20)30165-6

5.

Liu, Y. et al. Aerodynamic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 in two Wuhan hospitals. Nature 1–4 (2020).
doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2271-3

6.

Xu, Y. et al. Characteristics of pediatric SARS-CoV-2 infection and potential evidence for persistent fecal viral
shedding. Nat. Med. 26, 502–505 (2020).

7.

Xu, H. et al. High expression of ACE2 receptor of 2019-nCoV on the epithelial cells of oral mucosa. Int. J. Oral
Sci. 12, 8 (2020).

8.

Xiong, X.-L. et al. Comparative study of the clinical characteristics and epidemiological trend of 244 COVID-19
infected children with or without GI symptoms. Gut (2020). doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2020-321486

9.

Hosier, H. et al. First case of placental infection with SARS-CoV-2. doi:10.1101/2020.04.30.20083907

10.

Chen, H. et al. Clinical characteristics and intrauterine vertical transmission potential of COVID-19 infection in
nine pregnant women: a retrospective review of medical records. www.thelancet.com (2020).
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30360-3

11.

Patanè, L. et al. Vertical transmission of coronavirus disease 2019: severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 RNA on the fetal side of the placenta in pregnancies with coronavirus disease 2019–positive
mothers
and
neonates
at
birth.
Am.
J.
Obstet.
Gynecol.
MFM
100145
(2020).
doi:10.1016/J.AJOGMF.2020.100145

12.

Lu, X. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Children. N. Engl. J. Med. 382, 1663–1665 (2020).

13.

Dong, Y. et al. Epidemiology of COVID-19 Among Children in China. Pediatrics (2020). doi:10.1542/PEDS.20200702

14.

Zhang, H. et al. Digestive system is a potential route of COVID-19: An analysis of single-cell coexpression pattern
of key proteins in viral entry process. Gut 69, 1010–1018 (2020).

15.

Fatehullah, A., Tan, S. H. & Barker, N. Organoids as an in vitro model of human development and disease. Nat.
Cell Biol. 18, 246–254 (2016).

16.

Lamers, M. M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 productively infects human gut enterocytes. Science (80-. ). eabc1669 (2020).
doi:10.1126/science.abc1669

17.

Zhou, J. et al. Infection of bat and human intestinal organoids by SARS-CoV-2. Nat. Med. 1–7 (2020).
doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0912-6

18.

McCracken, K. W. et al. Modelling human development and disease in pluripotent stem-cell-derived gastric
organoids. Nature 516, 400–404 (2014).

19.

Bartfeld, S. et al. In vitro expansion of human gastric epithelial stem cells and their responses to bacterial
infection. Gastroenterology 148, 126-136.e6 (2015).

20.

Fordham, R. P. et al. Transplantation of expanded fetal intestinal progenitors contributes to colon regeneration
after injury. Cell Stem Cell 13, 734–744 (2013).

21.

Hu, H. et al. Long-Term Expansion of Functional Mouse and Human Hepatocytes as 3D Organoids. Cell 175,
1591-1606.e19 (2018).

22.

Giobbe, G. G. et al. Extracellular matrix hydrogel derived from decellularized tissues enables endodermal
organoid culture. Nat. Commun. (2019). doi:10.1038/s41467-019-13605-4

23.

Gao, S. et al. Tracing the temporal-spatial transcriptome landscapes of the human fetal digestive tract using
single-cell RNA-sequencing. Nat. Cell Biol. 20, 721–734 (2018).

24.

Co, J. Y. et al. Controlling Epithelial Polarity: A Human Enteroid Model for Host-Pathogen Interactions. Cell Rep.
26, 2509-2520.e4 (2019).

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

25.

Gómez-Carballa, A. et al. A qPCR expression assay of IFI44L gene differentiates viral from bacterial infections
in febrile children. Sci. Rep. 9, 11780 (2019).

26.

DeDiego, M. L., Martinez-Sobrido, L. & Topham, D. J. Novel Functions of IFI44L as a Feedback Regulator of
Host Antiviral Responses. J. Virol. 93, (2019).

27.

Yaari, G., Bolen, C. R., Thakar, J. & Kleinstein, S. H. Quantitative set analysis for gene expression: a method to
quantify gene set differential expression including gene-gene correlations. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, e170 (2013).

28.

Whittaker, E. et al. Clinical Characteristics of 58 Children With a Pediatric Inflammatory Multisystem Syndrome
Temporally Associated With SARS-CoV-2. JAMA (2020). doi:10.1001/jama.2020.10369

29.

Riphagen, S., Gomez, X., Gonzalez-Martinez, C., Wilkinson, N. & Theocharis, P. Hyperinflammatory shock in
children during COVID-19 pandemic. Lancet 395, 1607–1608 (2020).

30.

Pique-Regi, R. et al. Does the human placenta express the canonical cell entry mediators for SARS-CoV-2?
doi:10.1101/2020.05.18.101485

31.

Schlaermann, P. et al. A novel human gastric primary cell culture system for modelling Helicobacter pylori
infection in vitro. Gut 65, 202–213 (2016).

32.

Tian, Y., Rong, L., Nian, W. & He, Y. Review article: gastrointestinal features in COVID-19 and the possibility of
faecal transmission. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 51, 843–851 (2020).

33.

Richard, A. & Tulasne, D. Caspase cleavage of viral proteins, another way for viruses to make the best of
apoptosis. Cell Death and Disease 3, e277–e277 (2012).

34.

Diemer, C. et al. Cell Type-Specific Cleavage of Nucleocapsid Protein by Effector Caspases during SARS
Coronavirus Infection. J. Mol. Biol. 376, 23–34 (2008).

35.

Blanco-Melo, D. et al. Imbalanced Host Response to SARS-CoV-2 Drives Development of COVID-19. Cell 181,
1036-1045.e9 (2020).

36.

Konno, Y. et al. SARS-CoV-2 ORF3b is a potent interferon antagonist whose activity is further increased by a
naturally occurring elongation variant. bioRxiv 2020.05.11.088179 (2020). doi:10.1101/2020.05.11.088179

37.

Dobin, A. et al. Sequence analysis STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. 29, 15–21 (2013).

38.

Li, B. & Dewey, C. N. RSEM: Accurate transcript quantification from RNA-Seq data with or without a reference
genome. BMC Bioinformatics 12, 323 (2011).

39.

Robinson, M. D., Mccarthy, D. J. & Smyth, G. K. edgeR: a Bioconductor package for differential expression
analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinforma. Appl. NOTE 26, 139–140 (2010).

40.

Bindea, G. et al. ClueGO: a Cytoscape plug-in to decipher functionally grouped gene ontology and pathway
annotation networks. Bioinforma. Appl. NOTE 25, 1091–1093 (2009).

41.

Shannon, P. et al. Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks.
Genome Res. 13, 2498–504 (2003).

42.

Hachim, M. Y. et al. Interferon-Induced Transmembrane Protein (IFITM3) Is Upregulated Explicitly in SARSCoV-2 Infected Lung Epithelial Cells. Front. Immunol. 11, 1372 (2020).

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1. Human fetal stomach characterization. a) Schematic of the fetal and pediatric stomachs isolation,
characterization and gastric organoid derivation. b) Isolated human whole stomachs from terminated pregnancies,
from Carnegie stage 23 (mid-week 8) to post conception week (PCW) 21. Scale bar 1 cm. c) Hematoxylin and
Eosin staining of paraffin-embedded stomach sections from PCW 11 to PCW 20. Scale bars 100 µm in lower
magnification (left) and 20 µm in higher crypt magnification (right). d) Immunofluorescence panel showing mucin
5AC (MUC5AC) in green, pepsinogen C (PGC) in red and nuclei in blue (Hoechst). Scale bar 20 µm. e)
Immunofluorescence panel showing mucin 6 (MUC6) in green, chromogranin A (CHRA) in red and nuclei in blue
(Hoechst). Scale bar 20 µm. f) Real Time PCR analysis of early fetal, late fetal and pediatric stomachs. Relative
fold change to GAPDH. Mean ± SEM (n=3). Red dots on the bar charts represent single biological replicates.
Ordinary one-way ANOVA; p-value *<0.05, **<0.01, ***<0.001.

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2. Fetal gastric organoid derivation, expansion and characterization. a) Selective withdrawal of gastric
organoid cytokines from control (CTRL) complete medium, in CS 23 (mid-week 8) organoid line split at single cells
at passage 7. Scale bar 400 µm. b) Bright field images of representative organoid line for each of the 3 stages,
showing the formation of spherical organoids within 7 days starting from single cells. Scale bar 100 µm. c)
Immunofluorescence panel showing ezrin (EZR) in red, f-actin (F-ACT) in cyan, mucin 5AC (MUC5AC) in green
and nuclei in blue (Hoechst). Scale bars 25 µm. d) Cumulative cell counts during days of culture. Mean ± SD (n=4
biological replicates for early and late fetal, n=3 for pediatric organoids). e) Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
arrays. Representative images of the chromosome viewer and allele frequency presented for each analyzed
sample. f) Real Time PCR analysis of early fetal, late fetal and pediatric gastric organoids. Relative fold change to
GAPDH. Mean ± SEM (n=3). Red dots on the bar charts represent single biological replicates. Ordinary one-way
ANOVA; p-value *<0.05, **<0.01.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3: Transcriptomic characterization of gastric tissues and tissue-derived organoids from different
stages of development. a) Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of RNA-sequencing samples from organoids
(triangles) and fetal gastric epithelial tissues (circles) at different stages of development. Edge color identifies the
biological replicates or patients within the same group of samples. Stages of fetal tissues or derived gastric
organoids: early fetal (PCW 8-15), late fetal (week 17-20) and pediatric. b-c) Expression of typical gastric markers
in organoids (b) and gastric epithelium (c) at different stages of development. Red dots indicate single data points.
Black error bar: Mean ± SD (n = 4 for organoids biological replicates, n ≤ 3 for biological replicates tissues). CPM:
counts per million. d) Results of hierarchical clustering of organoid gene expression. The selected genes were
previously shown to define the six stomach cellular subtypes identified in Gao et al (2018)23 by single-cell RNAseq, as indicated on top of each plot. Genes whose name is preceded by an asterisk (*) are differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) between any pair of conditions. e) Pseudo-temporal profiles of gene expression according to
differential expression analysis. DEGs were clustered according to a flat, increasing, or decreasing profile between
pairs of time points. Data were scaled respect to the first time point. Red lines: average profile of each cluster.
Gray lines: profile of each gene in the cluster. Blue digits: cluster identification number. f) Selected categories from
Reactome enrichment analysis of genes in the clusters displayed in (e). Blue bars: graphical representation of the
indicated values of adjusted p-value. Full results are displayed in the Supplementary Information.
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4. Reverse polarity organoids for efficient SARS-CoV-2 infection. a) Schematic showing the protocol
for reversal of organoid polarity. ECM surrounding organoids is digested and organoids are cultured in suspension
for 3 days to reverse their polarity. Once apical aspect is exposed on the outer surface, organoids are infected
with SARS-CoV-2. b) Gastric organoids with normal (inner) polarity and large lumen. Immunofluorescence panel
showing f-actin (F-ACT) in red, zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) in violet, b-4 integrin (b-4 INT) in red, and nuclei in blue
(Hoechst). Scale bar 50 µm. c) Gastric organoids with reversed polarity, showing an almost absent lumen.
Immunofluorescence panel showing f-actin (F-ACT) in red, zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) in violet, b-4 integrin (b-4
INT) in red, mucin 5AC (MUC5AC) in green and nuclei in blue (Hoechst). Scale bar 50 µm. d-e) SARS-CoV-2
receptors, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) and transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) absolute
RNA-seq expression in gastric tissues (left) and gastric organoids (right). Mean ± SD (n < 3 for tissues biological
replicates, n = 3 for organoids). CPM: count per million. f) Immunofluorescence panel showing f-actin (F-ACT) in
red, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) in green and nuclei in blue (Hoechst), in fetal and pediatric gastric
organoids with reversed polarity. Scale bars 20 µm.
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 5. SARS-CoV-2 infection of human fetal and pediatric gastric organoids. a) Bright field images of
reversed-polarity organoids infected with pediatric patient-derived SARS-CoV-2 for 2 hours, and acquired at 48,
72 and 96 h post-infection. b) Infected cells in reversed organoids fixed at 96 h post-infection. Immunofluorescence
panel showing SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid Antibody (NP CoV) in red, marking infected cells (yellow arrows),
cleaved caspase 3 (CCAS3) in white, marking apoptotic cells, f-actin (F-ACT) in green and nuclei in blue (Hoechst).
Image is representative of at least 5 similar organoid images. Scale bar 50 µm. c) Infected cell details in reversed
organoids fixed at 96 h post-infection. Immunofluorescence panel showing viral double strand RNA J2 (dsRNA) in
red, SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid Antibody (NP CoV) in red, cleaved caspase 3 (CCAS3) in white, f-actin (F-ACT)
in green and nuclei in blue (Hoechst). Scale bars 10 µm. d) Graph of SARS-CoV-2 replication in fetal and pediatric
reverse-polarity organoids. Live virus yield of reverse-polarity organoids was titrated by FFA on Vero E6 cells of
culture supernatants collected at 0, 24, 48, 72 and 96 hours after infection with SARS-CoV-2. The dotted line
indicates the lower limit of detection. Red dots indicate single data points. Mean ± SD (N=3).

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 6. RNA-seq analysis highlights differential response to infection in organoids derived from different
developmental stages. a) Volcano plots indicating DEG genes of non-infected vs. infected sample comparisons
at each developmental stage (PCW 11, PCW 20, pediatric). b) Venn diagram of DEGs that responded differently
to the infection in any developmental stage in this study and DEGs identified in a literature survey of transcriptomic
data on SARS-CoV transfected samples42. c) Hierarchical clustering of DEG genes included in (b), data were
median-centered for each pair of non-infected and infected conditions. d) Results from an enrichment analysis
within Reactome database of DEGs highlighted in (a). Symbol size is proportional to number of genes. p-value <
10-5. White symbols were not enriched and were added to highlight the hierarchy between categories within
Reactome structure.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figures

Supplementary Figure 1. Cumulative cell counts of single organoid lines during days of culture, up to a period of
5 months.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 2. Transcriptomic characterization of organoids from different stages of development. a)
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of RNA-seq organoid samples at different stages of development as
indicated. Edge color identifies the biological replicates within the same group of samples. Stages of tissue of
origin for organoid derivation: early fetal (week 8-15), late fetal (week 17-20) and pediatric. b-e) Expression of
selected genes in organoid samples: (b) enteroendocrine cell markers, (b) intestinal marker CDX2, (d) parietal cell
markers typical of the corpus compartment, (e) putative genes identifying gastric stem cells. Red dots: single data
points. Black error bar: Mean± SD (n = 4). CPM: count per million.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 3. a) 3D Deconvolution confocal images. (Left) Gastric organoids with normal inner
polarity and large lumen. Immunofluorescence panel zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) in violet, b-4 integrin (b-4 INT) in
red, and nuclei in blue (Hoechst). Scale bars 50 µm. (Right) Gastric organoids with reversed polarity, showing an
almost absent lumen. Immunofluorescence panel showing f-actin (F-ACT) in red, zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) in
violet, b-4 integrin (b-4 INT) in red, mucin 5AC (MUC5AC) in green and nuclei in blue (Hoechst). Scale bars 50
µm. b) Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of RNA-sequencing samples from RP-GOs at different stages of
development (PCW 11, PCW 20, pediatric).

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 4. (a-c) SARS-CoV-2 staining at 64 h post-infection. a) Immunofluorescence panel on
control monkey cell line Vero E6 showing viral double strand RNA J2 (dsRNA) in red, f-actin (F-ACT) in green and
nuclei in blue (Hoechst). Scale bars 50 µm. b) Non-infected controls on Matrigel: whole organoids with normal
polarity (right), showing absence of viral double strand RNA J2 (dsRNA) in red, f-actin (F-ACT) in green and nuclei
in blue (Hoechst). Scale bars 50 µm. b) Low-efficiency infection in Matrigel whole organoids with normal polarity,
showing viral double strand RNA J2 (dsRNA) in red, f-actin (F-ACT) in green and nuclei in blue (Hoechst). Scale
bars 50 µm. d) SARS-CoV-2 staining at 96 h post-infection in reversed-polarity gastric organoids.
Immunofluorescence panel showing viral double strand RNA J2 (dsRNA) in red, SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid
Antibody (NP CoV) in red, cleaved caspase 3 (CCAS3) in white, f-actin (F-ACT) in green and nuclei in blue
(Hoechst). Scale bar 50 µm.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Tables
Supplementary Table 1. Gastric samples list
Organoid
derivation

Sample

Stage

Age

1

Early fetal

CS20

2

Early fetal

CS23

3

Early fetal

4
5
6
7

Early fetal
Early fetal
Early fetal
Early fetal

PCW 8
(late)
PCW 9
PCW 9
PCW 10
PCW 10

8

Early fetal

PCW 11

Yes

9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

Early fetal
Early fetal
Early fetal
Early fetal
Early fetal
Early fetal
Early fetal
Early fetal
Early fetal
Early fetal
Early fetal
Early fetal
Late Fetal
Late Fetal
Late Fetal
Late Fetal
Late Fetal
Late Fetal
Late Fetal
Late Fetal
Late Fetal
Late Fetal
Late Fetal
Late Fetal

PCW 11
PCW 11
PCW 11
PCW 11
PCW 11
PCW 12
PCW 12
PCW 12
PCW 13
PCW 14
PCW 15
PCW 15
PCW 16
PCW 16
PCW 17
PCW 17
PCW 17
PCW 17
PCW 18
PCW 18
PCW 18
PCW 19
PCW 19
PCW 19

Yes
Yes

33

Late Fetal

PCW 20

Yes

34
35
36
37
38
39

Late Fetal
Late Fetal
Late Fetal
Late Fetal
Late Fetal
Late Fetal

PCW 20
PCW 20
PCW 20
PCW 20
PCW 21
PCW 21

40

Pediatric

11 yo

Yes

41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49

Pediatric
Pediatric
Pediatric
Pediatric
Pediatric
Pediatric
Pediatric
Pediatric
Pediatric

1 yo
11 mo
4 mo
8 yo
8 yo
3 yo
8 yo
4 yo
13 yo

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Use
Immuno
Macro/Immunofluorescence/Sequencing/RTPCR/Cell
count
Macro

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Cell count
Macro
Macro
Sequencing
Sequencing/RTPCR/Cell
count/Immunofluorescence/Infection
Expansion
Cell count
Macro/Immunofluorescence/H&E
Macro/Immunofluorescence/H&E
Sequencing
Macro/Immunofluorescence/H&E
Macro/Immunofluorescence/H&E
Macro/Immunofluorescence/H&E
Macro/Immunofluorescence/H&E
Macro
Macro
Sequencing
Macro/Immunofluorescence/H&E
Macro/Immunofluorescence/H&E
Macro/H&E
Macro/H&E
Macro/H&E
Sequencing
Sequencing/RTPCR/Cell count
Macro/H&E
Sequencing
Cell count
Macro
Macro
Sequencing/RTPCR/Cell
count/Immunofluorescence/Infection
Macro/Immunofluorescence/H&E
Macro/Immunofluorescence/H&E
Macro/Immunofluorescence/H&E
Sequencing
Macro/Immunofluorescence
Macro/Immunofluorescence/Cell count
Sequencing/RTPCR/Cell
count/Immunofluorescence/Infection
Sequencing/RTPCR
Expansion
Expansion
Sequencing
Sequencing
Sequencing
Sequencing
Sequencing
Sequencing

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.167049; this version posted June 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Table 2. Human fetal and pediatric gastric organoid medium

Component
Advanced DMEM F-12 (Thermo 12634)
HEPES (Thermo 15630080)
Glutamax (Thermo 35050061)
Pen/Strep (Thermo 15140122)
Primocin (Thermo Fisher NC9392943)
B-27 supplement minus vitamin A (Thermo 12587010)
n-acetylcysteine (Sigma A9165)
Wnt-3A (Peprotech 315-20)
R-spondin 1 (Peprotech 120-38)
Noggin (Peprotech 120-10C)
EGF (Thermo Fisher PMG8043)
Gastrin (Sigma G9020)
GSK-3 inhibitor (CHIR 99021) (Tocris 4423)
TGFb inhibitor (A83-01) (Sigma SML0788)
FGF10 (Peprotech 100-26)
ROCK inhibitor Y-27632 (Tocris 1254)

Stock conc.
1M
100 X
100 %
50 mg/mL
50 X
500 mM
50 µg/mL
100 µg/mL
100 µg/mL
500 µg/mL
100 µM
3 mM
500 µM
100 µg/mL
10 mg/mL

Final conc.
To volume
10 mM
2 mM
1%
2 µL/mL
1X
1.25 mM
100 ng/mL
500 ng/mL
100 ng/mL
50 ng/mL
10 nM
3 µM
5 µM
200 ng/mL
10 µg/mL

Supplementary Table 3. Antibody list

Antibody
Chromogranin A (CHGA)
Mucin 5AC (MUC5AC)
Mucin 6 (MUC6)
Pepsinogen (PGC)
Ezrin (EZR)
Zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1)
Integrin beta-4 (INTB4)
Cleaved Caspase-3 (CCAS3)
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2)
Double Strand RNA (dsRNA J2)
SARS-CoV/SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid (NP
CoV )
anti-Mouse 647 (secondary AB)
anti-Rabbit 647 (secondary AB)
anti-Rat 568 (secondary AB)
anti-Rabbit 594 (secondary AB)
anti-Rabbit 568 (secondary AB)
anti-Rabbit 488 (secondary AB)
anti-Mouse 488 (secondary AB)
anti-Mouse 568 (secondary AB)
Phalloidin (f-actin)
Phalloidin (f-actin)
Hoechst 33342 (nuclear staining)

Code
ab15160
ma5-12178
ab216017
HPA031717
PA5-29358

Host
Rabbit
Mouse
Mouse
Rabbit
Rabbit

Dilution
1:50
1:100
1:100
1:100
1:200

Rabbit

1:200

ab110167
9661
MAB933
J2

Brand
Abcam
Invitrogen
Abcam
Atlas
Thermo Fisher
Life
Technologies
Abcam
Cell Signaling
R&D Systems
Scicons

Rat
Rabbit
Mouse
Mouse

1:200
1:400
1:100
1:200

40143-MM05

Sino Biological

Mouse

1:200

A32788
A32795
A11007
A11012
A11011
A11008
A11001
A10037
A22287
A12379

Thermo Fisher
Thermo Fisher
Thermo Fisher
Thermo Fisher
Thermo Fisher
Thermo Fisher
Thermo Fisher
Thermo Fisher
Thermo Fisher
Thermo Fisher

Donkey
Donkey
Goat
Donkey
Goat
Goat
Goat
Goat
-----

H1399

Thermo Fisher

---

1:300
1:300
1:300
1:300
1:300
1:300
1:300
1:300
1:100
1:100
10
µg/mL

40-2200

29

