bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Type I Interferon Limits Viral Dissemination-Driven Clinical Heterogeneity in a Native Murine
Betacoronavirus Model of COVID-19
Hua Qing1,2,15, Lokesh Sharma3,4,15, Brandon K. Hilliard1,2, Xiaohua Peng3,4,11, Anush
Swaminathan1,2,14, Justin Tian1,2, Kavita Israni-Winger1,2, Cuiling Zhang1,2, Delva Leão6,
Seungjin Ryu6, Victoria Habet7, Lin Wang3, Xuefei Tian8, Yina Ma9, Shuta Ishibe8, Lawrence
H. Young9, Sergei Kotenko10, Susan Compton6, Carmen J. Booth6, Aaron M. Ring2, Vishwa
Deep Dixit2,6,12, Craig B. Wilen2,13, João P. Pereira2, Charles S. Dela Cruz3,4,15*, Andrew
Wang1,2,15,16*
1

Department of Medicine (Rheumatology, Allergy & Immunology), Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT
2
Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
3
Department of Medicine (Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine), Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
4
Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
6
Department of Comparative Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
7
Department of Pediatrics (Critical Care Medicine), Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT
8
Department of Medicine (Nephrology), Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
9
Department of Medicine (Cardiology), Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
10
Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Center for Cell
Signaling, Center for Immunity and Inflammation, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School,
Newark, NJ
11
Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, 40016, China
12
Program in Integrative Cell Signaling and Neurobiology of Metabolism;
13
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
USA.
14
Medical Scientist Training Program, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT

15
16

*

These authors contributed equally to this work
Lead Contact

Correspondence: andrew.wang@yale.edu; charles.delacruz@yale.edu

Summary
Emerging clinical data demonstrates that COVID-19, the disease caused by SARS-CoV2, is
a syndrome that variably affects nearly every organ system. Indeed, the clinical
heterogeneity of COVID-19 ranges from relatively asymptomatic to severe disease with
death resultant from multiple constellations of organ failures. In addition to genetics and host
characteristics, it is likely that viral dissemination is a key determinant of disease
manifestation. Given the complexity of disease expression, one major limitation in current
animal models is the ability to capture this clinical heterogeneity due to technical limitations
related to murinizing SARS-CoV2 or humanizing mice to render susceptible to infection.
Here we describe a murine model of COVID-19 using respiratory infection with the native

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

mouse betacoronavirus MHV-A59. We find that whereas high viral inoculums uniformly led
to hypoxemic respiratory failure and death, lethal dose 50% (LD50) inoculums led to a
recapitulation of most hallmark clinical features of COVID-19, including lymphocytopenias,
heart and liver damage, and autonomic dysfunction. We find that extrapulmonary
manifestations are due to viral metastasis and identify a critical role for type-I but not type-III
interferons in preventing systemic viral dissemination. Early, but not late treatment with
intrapulmonary type-I interferon, as well as convalescent serum, provided significant
protection from lethality by limiting viral dissemination. We thus establish a Biosafety Level II
model that may be a useful addition to the current pre-clinical animal models of COVID-19
for understanding disease pathogenesis and facilitating therapeutic development for human
translation.

Introduction
COVID-19, the disease caused by SARS-CoV-2, results in a wide range of clinical phenotypes
ranging from asymptomatic to death with manifestations that have been described in virtually
every organ system (Gupta et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2020). One major limitation in developing
effective therapies is in the lack of animal models that recapitulate mechanisms of cell and
tissue injury and that capture the wide clinical heterogeneity observed in humans. Indeed,
widespread access in academic and biopharmaceutical institutions to animal models that can
recapitulate the myriad of clinical expressions seen in patients are essential to characterize
the pathophysiology of this novel coronavirus infection to maximize therapeutic development.
Unfortunately, few species are naturally receptive to infection by SARS-CoV-2. These include
model species that are difficult to maintain and genetically modify and include non-human
primates (Munster et al., 2020), ferrets (Kim et al., 2020) and hamsters (Chan et al., 2020);
moreover, inoculation of SARS-CoV-2 strains isolated from clinical patients does not produce
the full clinical heterogeneity observed in COVID-19, limiting their utility as preclinical models.

Mice are the most accessible and versatile model species for preclinical development.
However, they are resistant to human SARS-CoV-2 infection due to the low affinity of the
mouse ACE2 receptor for the Spike protein. Thus, several groups have recently reported
strategies that allow mice to be receptive to SARS-CoV-2 infection either by transgenic
expression of human ACE2 (hACE2), expressing hACE2 using adenovirus technology, or
mouse-adapting SARS-CoV-2 (Bao et al., 2020; Gu et al., 2020; Hassan et al., 2020; Israelow
et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2020a; Sun et al., 2020b). One common characteristic in all of these
mouse models is the fairly mild disease expression and limited viral dissemination, which is

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

either a result of the design of the model system (respiratory transduction with adenovirus) or
a limitation of the system (transgenic models), precluding the ability to study the full spectrum
of disease observed in COVID-19 patients. Indeed, viral dissemination is emerging as a key
driver in the pathogenesis of COVID-19 underlying its wide clinical heterogeneity (Puelles et
al., 2020). It is likely that in order to develop COVID-19-like disease in animals expressing
human ACE2 throughout the body, SARS-CoV-2 will have to be further “murinized” through
serial passaging, as was observed in MERS-CoV animal models (Li et al., 2017). In addition
to humanizing the mouse with transgenic expression of human DPP4, it was also necessary
to murinize the native MERS-CoV in order to develop an animal model of human disease (Li
et al., 2017). However, the resultant mouse-adapted MERS-CoV 22 contained over 22 novel
mutations, including several within the spike protein, undermining, to some extent, the
rationale for this experimental approach, which was to enable use of native patient isolates in
mice. Indeed, a recent study that mouse-adapted the Spike protein was also insufficient to
recapitulate severe human disease, suggesting, as in the experience with MERS-CoV, that
other viral elements also need to be mouse adapted to cause COVID-19-like disease (Gu et
al., 2020).

We thus hypothesized that the use of a native murine beta coronavirus may obviate many of
the limitations inherent in murinizing SARS-CoV-2 and humanizing mice, better recapitulate
human disease, and, importantly, be a broadly useful BSL2 platform widely accessible to the
research community to explore COVID-19 pathophysiology, recognizing that it may not
recapitulate some host-pathogen features specific to SARS-CoV-2. To this end, we utilized
the murine coronavirus Mouse Hepatitis Virus (MHV) Strain A59. MHV-A59 is a positive-sense
virus with a single-stranded RNA genome of approximately 31 kilobases which bears high
similarity to SARS-CoV-2. MHV-A59 has been previously shown to cause pneumonia in
C57Bl6/J mice (Coronaviridae Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of,
2020; Yang et al., 2014), unlike other MHV strains that require A/J, C3H/HeJ, or other
backgrounds to develop pneumonia (DeAlbuquerque et al., 2006; Leibowitz et al., 2010). As
seen in Supplemental Figure 1A, SARS-CoV-2 and MHV-A59 belong to the same
phylogenetic clade (adapted from (Gorbalenya et al., 2004)), have highly similar genomic
structure (Supplemental Figure 1B) (adapted from (Frieman and Baric, 2008; Naqvi et al.,
2020)) and share high degrees of peptide sequence homology (Supplemental Figure 1C).
MHV-A59 utilizes the entry receptor CEACAM1, which is expressed on respiratory epithelium,
but also on enterocytes, endothelial cells, monocytes, and neurons, as is the case with ACE2
(Compton et al., 1992; Godfraind et al., 1995). To assess the similarities in tissue tropism, we
found that Ceacam1 and Ace2 are co-expressed in most tissues that we analyzed. While

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Ceacam1 is more highly expressed in liver, Ace2 is more highly expressed in kidney, with very
similar expression in other assessed organs (Supplemental Figure 1D), and both genes were
similarly regulated following respiratory MHV-A59 infection consistent with reports that both
genes are interferon-inducible (Supplemental Figure 1E) (Dery et al., 2014; Ziegler et al.,
2020). Therefore, we intranasally infected C57Bl6/J mice with MHV-A59 to test whether it
could serve as a model of COVID-19.

We found that respiratory infection of MHV-A59 caused a broad spectrum of clinical symptoms
that parallels the clinical heterogeneity seen in COVID-19. At high viral loads, infection caused
uniform lethality (LD100) secondary to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). At lethal
dose 50% (LD50) viral loads, we observed, surprisingly, that survivors and non-survivors did
not differ significantly in the degree of hypoxemia, suggesting causes of death resultant from
other organ system failures. Concordantly, in these animals, we observed systemic
inflammation and multi-organ involvement that mirrored pathophysiological features seen in
humans. We found that tissue inflammation and damage occurred at the sites of MHV-A59
dissemination distal to the respiratory portal of entry. We thus examined the roles of type-I
and type-III interferons in controlling viral dissemination. Surprisingly, we found that type I
interferon receptor-deficient (IFNAR1-/-) animals, but not type III interferon-deficient mice, were
exquisitely sensitive to MHV-A59-induced mortality but that it was not resultant from
respiratory failure. Indeed, IFNAR-/- animals displayed minimal hypoxemia and little enhanced
pulmonary damage, viral burden, and inflammation. Instead, we found that type-I interferon
was required for limiting systemic dissemination of MHV-A59, and, specifically, limiting
dissemination and inflammation to other organs and in regions of the brain, including the
hypothalamus, necessary for maintaining autonomic control. Consistent with these
observations, early treatment with intrapulmonary recombinant type-I interferon significantly
improved survival of MHV-A59-infected animals, while later treatment had no effect. Here we
establish a native mouse betacoronavirus preclinical model of COVID-19 that may be useful
for the study of COVID-19 pathophysiology and reveal the potential therapeutic role for type I
interferons in this disease. This work contributes to the urgent need for early detection and
intervention and the development of effective antiviral agents.

Results
Intranasal MHV-A59 infection leads to severe and dose-dependent clinical disease

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

SARS-CoV-2 respiratory infection in humans leads to a large diversity of clinical
manifestations. To test if respiratory MHV-A59 infection recapitulated this aspect of human
disease, we intranasally inoculated C57Bl/6J animals with increasing plaque-forming units
(PFU) of MHV-A59. We observed a dose-dependent effect of MHV-A59 inoculation load on
rates of host lethality (Figure 1A). Interestingly, regardless of the viral inocula, animals
uniformly lost weight, peaking at approximately 25% body weight loss at day post-infection
(dpi) 7 (Figure 1B), which was accompanied by infection-induced anorexia (Supplemental
Figure S2A). To assess pulmonary function, we monitored pulse oximetry daily in infected
animals and found that LD100 doses of MHV-A59 lead to rapid and progressive hypoxic
respiratory failure (Figure 1C), which was not uniformly observed in LD50 animals. Indeed,
LD100-challenged animals uniformly had oxygen saturations below 80% and were all moribund
or dead by dpi 5. Considerable heterogeneity of pathology was observed in hypoxic animals
(Supplemental Figure S2F). However, histopathologic analyses of lungs in hypoxic animals
sacrificed at the height of viral load demonstrated pathology consistent with ARDS, including
organizing pneumonia, interstitial pneumonitis, hyaline membrane formation and type-II
pneumocyte hyperplasia and occasional hemorrhage and microthrombi when assessed by a
blinded pathologist (CJB, Figure 1E, and Supplemental Figure S2F). These animals were also
progressively unable to regulate heart rate and body temperature, suggesting severe
autonomic dysfunction, while both LD0 and LD50-infected animals, on average, showed a trend
towards relative bradycardia during the course of infection (Supplemental Figure S2B-E). We
thus examined the pathogen burden in the lungs of animals challenged with LD50 doses and
found that MHV-A59 proliferated in the lungs; the viral load started to significantly decrease at
the inflection point of weight loss (Figure 1D). Thus, as seen in COVID-19, respiratory infection
with MHV-A59 can lead to ARDS, the severity of which, in this model, occurs as a function of
viral load.

In COVID-19, it is clear that patient characteristics, such as age, male sex, and those with
underlying co-morbid conditions significantly increase susceptibility to both pulmonary and
extrapulmonary disease (Grasselli et al., 2020; Mallapaty, 2020; Takahashi et al., 2020;
Williamson et al., 2020). In the current study, we use lean 8-12-week old (adult) regular chowfed males. As with COVID-19, females were significantly more resistant to MHV-A59 infection
than males (Supplemental Figure S2G). This is the opposite of what is reported with influenza
A virus infection in mice where female mice are significantly more sensitive to influenzamediated death (Klein et al., 2012).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Next, we evaluated whether MHV-A59 animals generated an adaptive immune response that
could protect from a subsequent fatal re-challenge. As expected, infected animals generated
a robust IgG response to MHV-A59 (Figure 1F), and by 14 dpi had high titers of most IgG
subclasses (Supplemental Figure S2H-J). Re-challenging animals that survived the initial
infection 21 dpi with LD100 doses led to complete protection regardless of the original
inoculating dose (Figure 1G, H). Impressively, convalescent animals did not lose any weight
(Figure 1I) or develop anorexia (Supplemental Figure 2K). This protection was specific to
MHV-A59 as it was not observed when convalescent animals were re-challenged with
respiratory infection with influenza (IAV); neither prior- nor co-exposure to non-lethal doses of
MHV-A59 enhanced IAV-mediated mortality (Supplemental Figure 2L-P).

Taken together, our findings demonstrate that intranasal MHV-A59 causes ARDS, hypoxic
respiratory failure, and death in C57Bl6/J mice as a function of the initial viral inocula. We
show that virus-specific humoral immunity is generated and capable of protecting animals from
LD100 ARDS-mediated fatal viral loads. We also did not observe obvious synergy between IAV
and MHV-A59 in enhancing mortality.

Respiratory MHV-A59 infection causes systemic inflammation and multiorgan damage
as a function of systemic viral dissemination
We were intrigued by the phenotype observed in LD50-challenged animals, since they did not
demonstrate clear hypoxic respiratory failure, and yet half succumbed to the respiratory
infection, as it was highly reminiscent of the clinical heterogeneity seen in human COVID-19.
Indeed, the degree of hypoxia did not correlate with the mortality of LD50-challenged animals
(Figure 2A), nor did it correlate with derangements in other vital signs (Supplemental Figure
S3A).

We thus examined the function of other organs in animals challenged with LD50 doses. We
found that animals developed hematologic abnormalities (Figure 2B, C, Supplemental Figure
2Q-U) characterized by absolute lymphopenia with delayed thrombocytopenia, a feature of
COVID-19 highly associated with mortality (Zhao et al., 2020). Animals also developed
evidence of hepatic damage (Figure 2D), another common finding in COVID-19 associated
with mortality (Hundt et al., 2020). Based on serum troponin elevation, some animals also
showed evidence of cardiac injury (Figure 2E), which is a common manifestation in COVID19 patients (Momtazmanesh et al., 2020). All animals displayed evidence of systemic

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

inflammation (Figure 2F-I), reminiscent of a “cytokine storm,” similar to what is observed in
COVID-19 (Lucas et al., 2020; Ragab et al., 2020); circulating levels of tumor necrosis factorα (TNF-α), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and interferon-α (IFN-α) peaked at 6 dpi, when viral loads in
the lung were decreasing, except for interferon-β (IFN-β), which peaked at 3 dpi.

In autopsy series, SARS-CoV-2 has been shown to variably disseminate to extrapulmonary
organs where it is thought to drive extrapulmonary manifestations of COVID-19
immunopathology (Gupta et al., 2020; Puelles et al., 2020). Indeed, part of the clinical
heterogeneity in COVID-19 is thought to stem from the wide expression of ACE2 on cells
outside the lung and resultant viral dissemination and local injury resulting from direct viral
damage or associated immunopathology. As shown, ACE2 and CEACAM1 are co-expressed
in many organs (Supplemental Figure 1D-E). We found that even at LD0 doses, respiratory
infection with MHV-A59 led to viral dissemination to multiple organs, including parts of the
brain (Supplemental Figure S3B). Thus, to determine if organ damage at the LD50 dose
correlated with viral dissemination, we assessed for inflammation and MHV-A59 burden
across multiple tissues (Figure 2J, K and Supplemental Figure 3C-N). We found that infection
with MHV-A59 induced expression of Ceacam1 in many tissues (Figure 2J, K, left). On 3 dpi,
there was a significant increase in viral burden in the liver and lung, which corresponded with
an induction of canonical interferon-stimulated genes (ISG) and inflammatory transcripts
(Figure 2J). On 6 dpi, there were significant increases in viral burden in the heart and brain,
with corresponding increases in ISGs and inflammatory transcripts (Figure 2K and
Supplemental Figure S3H-K). These results are consistent with plasma biomarkers indicating
hepatic and cardiac damage. Interestingly, there was not a strong correlation between
Ceacam1 relative abundance (Supplemental Figure 1D) or fold induction by MHV-A59
infection, similar to what is observed in viral dissemination relative to Ace2 expression in
humans (Gupta et al., 2020; Puelles et al., 2020). In our studies, animals were systemically
perfused for tissue fixation so that our findings are unlikely to reflect a significant contribution
of MHV by peripheral blood to the measured content in tissues. However, we observed a
strong correlation between tissues in which there was high MHV-A59 burden and tissue
inflammation, which corresponded to tissues where we had observed damage, including parts
of the brain required for autonomic control, the liver, and heart.

Our data thus suggests that extrapulmonary organ damage was resultant from viral
dissemination and associated immunopathology in animals given doses of MHV-A59
insufficient to uniformly cause respiratory failure. Importantly, respiratory infection of MHV-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A59 captures a surprising number of prognostic and characteristic clinical findings in COVID19.

Type-I Interferons are Necessary for Pathogen Control in Respiratory MHV-A59
Infection
Type-I and III interferon (IFN)-mediated responses play important roles in the viral immune
response, both in controlling pathogen burden and also in tuning the immune response
(Grajales-Reyes, 2020; Park and Iwasaki, 2020). Decreased Type-I IFN response has been
correlated with increased disease severity in human SARS-CoV-2 patients (Hadjadj et al.,
2020), leading to clinical trials of recombinant IFN-b in COVID-19 patients (Walz et al., 2020).
Given that we observed variable viral dissemination in LD50-challenged animals as a
pathogenic cause of mortality, we thus examined the role of Type-I and III interferons in the
host response to MHV-A59.

We inoculated mice deficient in either type-I interferon receptor (IFNAR1-/-) or type-III
interferon receptor (IFNLR1-/-), or mice deficient in both of these receptors (DKO). Indeed, one
major advantage of the MHV-A59 model is that it causes COVID-19-like disease on a
C57Bl56/J genetic background, allowing for the use of readily available genetic tools for
pathway dissection. We found that IFNAR1-/- and DKO mice were exquisitely sensitive to MHVA59. LD0 PFUs in wildtype mice caused 100% lethality in IFNAR1-/- and DKO animals, which
succumbed to infection by 4 dpi (Figure 3A), regardless of gender of animal (Supplemental
Figure S4A). This was associated with a modest change in weight loss significant at 3 dpi
(Figure 3B). No apparent morbidity or mortality was observed in IFNLR1-/- animals, suggesting
a major role for IFNAR1 and a dispensable role of IFNLR1 in mediating host survival to MHVA59 infection at this dose. However, using a viral inoculum of 100 PFU (100-fold dilution of
LD0 for wildtype animals), we observed increased mortality in the DKO compared to IFNAR1/-

mice, unveiling a potential protective role of type-III interferon (Supplemental Figure S4B).

Since IFNAR is expressed in virtually all cells in the body, we next asked if IFNAR1 expression
would be required in the myeloid compartment, as had been previously demonstrated when
MHV-A59 was inoculated via the intraperitoneal route (Cervantes-Barragan et al., 2009). We
thus generated mice with myeloid-specific deletion of IFNAR1 using Cre-mediated deletion
under the control of the Lysozyme 2 promoter (LysMCre, Ifnar f/f DLysM). As expected, Ifnar f/f

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

DLysM

animals were significantly more susceptible to MHV-A59 infection than their f/f littermate

controls, indicating that IFNAR expression was required on myeloid cells (Figure 3C).

We then examined respiratory function in type-I and type-III interferon-deficient animals.
Unexpectedly, IFNAR1-/- and DKO animals did not display significant hypoxemia when
moribund (Figure 3D) despite modestly increased viral burdens and pleocytosis in the
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) (Figure 3E and Supplemental Figure S4C). This was consistent
with relatively minor observed histopathologic evidence of pulmonary disease (Figure 3F).
Next, we looked at the magnitude of systemic inflammation. We observed modest increases
in systemic inflammatory cytokines at the same peri-moribund time point (Figure 3G-I). We
did not detect differences in the amount of MHV-A59-specific IgM levels as a result of IFNAR1
deficiency (Supplemental Figure S4D).

However, when we quantitated viral burden in a wide range of organs, we found that MHVA59 burden was dramatically increased in virtually every tissue we assessed in animals
lacking IFNAR1, including the blood (Figure 3J log-scale, and Supplemental Figure S4E-K,
linear-scale), which corresponded with increased inflammatory transcripts (Figure 3K-L and
Supplemental Figure S4L-S, linear-scale). While all organs from IFNAR1-/-, but not IFNLR1-/-,
animals displayed >10 fold more viral load compared to wildtype controls, the heart and liver
displayed the most increase in inflammatory transcripts, with greater than 10-fold increases
in the observed amount of Il6 message compared to wildtype.

Taken together, MHV-A59 infection results in induction of type-I interferons which is required
for controlling systemic dissemination of pathogen burden. LD0 doses are uniformly and
rapidly lethal in IFNAR1-/- animals. Unexpectedly, IFNAR1 deficiency does not significantly
lead to enhanced pulmonary viral burden or death resultant from hypoxemic respiratory failure.

MHV-A59 respiratory infection in IFNAR-deficiency reveals vulnerability in autonomic
control
To assess the cause of death in IFNAR-deficient animals, we assessed organ function and
vital signs. We focused on the liver and heart given the dramatic changes in inflammatory
transcripts observed in these organs. Unexpectedly, despite evidence of increased hepatic
and cardiac viral load, we observed neither significantly increased biomarkers (ALT and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

troponin) indicative of organ injury (Figure 4A and B, Supplemental Figure S5A), nor
histopathological changes consistent with significant increased tissue damage in IFNAR1-/versus wildtype controls (Supplemental Figure S5B, C). Consistent with the correlation
between lymphopenia and worse outcomes, IFNAR1-/- animals displayed more lymphopenia
(Supplemental Figure S5D) than wild-type controls

However, we detected diminished heart rate responses to viral infection in IFNAR-deficient
animals (Figure 4C) but not in other vital parameters, including pulse distension, which is a
surrogate for blood pressure (Supplemental Figure S5E-H). Given the high infectivity of MHV
amongst mouse colonies, it was not possible in our animal facilities to perform continuous
invasive telemetric monitoring of blood pressure and heart rate to better assess heart rate
variability or blood pressure. Maintenance of heart rate is in-part controlled by central nervous
system (CNS), and especially the hypothalamus and brainstem (Farmer et al., 2016; Pinol et
al., 2018). We thus assessed MHV-A59 burden in different parts of the brain and observed
profound increases in viral load in the brain, including the hypothalamus and brainstem in
IFNAR1-deficient mice relative to wildtype controls (Figure 4D, Supplemental Figure S4E).
Analyses of single-cell RNA sequencing of the hypothalamus demonstrates nearly identical
co-expression of Ace2 and Ceacam1 (Supplemental Figure S5I). This was associated with
corresponding increases in tissue inflammatory transcripts (Figure 4E-F). These findings are
consistent with our findings that LD50 animals displayed central nervous system inflammation,
including CNS inflammation (Figure 2K), and relative bradycardia generally displayed by
infected animals, regardless of inoculating dose, throughout their course of disease (Figure
S2C). Our data thus suggests that MHV-A59-induced CNS dysfunction may be a key
component in pathogenesis, a vulnerability that was magnified and revealed in the context of
IFNAR deficiency. Our findings in the CNS are reminiscent of the ‘long-haulers’ phenotype,
where many convalescent COVID-19 patients continue to have symptoms of dysregulated
autonomic control (Romero-Sanchez et al., 2020).

Having established a role of interferon deficiency as a major contributor to viral dissemination
and subsequent extrapulmonary damage and resultant death, we aimed to understand if typeI interferon treatment could improve viral clearance in MHVA-59 infection. This therapeutic is
currently being pursued in clinical trials (Walz et al., 2020). To test this, we treated mice with
interferon b at 1µg/mouse by intra-tracheal route at early (12 hours and 36 hours) or later (36
hours and 48 hours) timepoints after a lethal dose of MHV-A59 intranasal infection. Mice that
were treated early but not later in the disease course were significantly protected from MHV-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A59 infection (Figure 4G, H). As expected, early treatment of IFN-b suppressed viral
production as indicated by the decreased viral load in the BAL and lung tissue (Figure 4I, J)
and in the liver (Figure 4K) from infected animals 3 days post infection. Consistent with our
knockout studies, protection was also not observed with IFN-l administration at early disease
course (Supplemental Figure S5J). Finally, we performed convalescent serum transfers in
wildtype and IFNAR1-/- animals and found that a single low-volume injection of convalescent
serum provided modest but significant protection from MHV-A59 induced death and reduced
viral load (Supplemental Figure S5K-O), suggesting adaptive immunity can provide some
protection despite major deficiency in innate immune system.

Taken together, we demonstrate that respiratory infection with a native mouse
betacoronavirus, MHV-A59, recapitulates most aspects of COVID-19 pathophysiology and
clinical heterogeneity. We demonstrate its utility as a BSL2 platform on the C57/Bl6J genetic
background to dissect disease pathogenesis and as a useful pre-clinical model for testing
COVID-19 therapeutics. This work also demonstrates the utility of type I interferon as a
potential therapeutic option against coronaviral infections, which are critically needed in
COVID-19.

Discussion
As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to spread across the globe, the need to understand
disease pathophysiology and to apply this knowledge to novel therapeutic strategies is an
urgent need. Animal models are critical in this effort, with mice being the most efficient models
given their size, ease of husbandry and maintenance, as well as the vast available genetic
and pharmacologic tools. In the current study, we show that C57Bl6/J mice infected with a
native murine betacoronavirus MHV-A59 recapitulates many aspects of COVID-19
pathophysiology. Intranasal inoculation of MHV-A59 produced a productive infection that
develop many of the hallmark features of human COVID-19 disease, including ARDS,
lymphopenia, multiorgan involvement, and systemic inflammation. We thus present a BSL2
platform animal model using C57Bl6/J that may be a useful tool in the ongoing COVID-19
effort. This model could be widely available to laboratories given a lack of need for BSL3
facilities and the use of the most commonly used inbred strain and greatly enhance COVID19-related efforts.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Our model utilizes MHV-A59, a beta coronavirus highly phylogenetically related to SARS-CoV2 that is native to mice, and the scourge of mouse colonies given its high infectivity to case
fatality rate (Compton et al., 2004). The major limitations of MHV-A59 is that it 1) does not
capture all SARS-CoV-2-intrinsic pathogenic factors and that 2) the entry receptor of MHVA59 CEACAM1 is not co-localized exactly with that of ACE2-expressing cells. However, we
argue that, teleologically, our approach may not be that disparate from the ongoing efforts
attempting to humanize mice and murinize SARS-CoV-2 to recapitulate human disease.
Indeed, the only models that currently recapitulate severe disease using SARS-CoV-2 require
the forced expression (using K18 or Hfh4 promoters) of human ACE2 in tissues which do not
endogenously express ACE2 (Jiang et al., 2020; McCray et al., 2007). Likewise, based on the
published data and previous experience with MERS-CoV, it is highly likely that murinization of
SARS-CoV-2 will be required in order to produce COVID-19-like disease in mice where
endogenous ACE2 expression is maintained. Therefore, while our model may lack certain
features important for SARS-CoV-2-specific host-pathogen interactions, it is unlikely that any
host other than a human will capture SARS-CoV-2-specific host-pathogen interactions. On the
other hand, the MHV-A59 mouse model, which is the species-appropriate pathogen in its
corresponding host, recapitulates a surprising number of characteristics of COVID-19.

Perhaps the most astonishing feature COVID-19 is the wide breadth of clinical manifestations.
A confounding factor in these clinical epidemiologic studies is that the time and dose of viral
inoculation is unknown and thus different arrays of manifestation may simply represent
differences in the inoculum size and duration of the disease course. Despite this caveat, the
observed disease trajectories are widely variable and range from asymptomatic disease to
death with an unpredictable array of clinical manifestations. The host substrate and viral
inocula are two factors that are critical in determining the disease trajectory. The MHV-A59
model recapitulates the enhanced susceptibility of male animals to lethal disease observed in
COVID-19 (Grasselli et al., 2020; Mallapaty, 2020; Takahashi et al., 2020; Williamson et al.,
2020). It remains to be seen if mouse models of aging, obesity, myocardial infarction or
hypertension will also be more sensitive to MHV-A59 respiratory infection and what
vulnerabilities are conferred by these underlying disease states.

In the young adult human population without known underlying comorbidities, mortality seems
to be stochastic (DeBiasi et al., 2020). We speculate that respiratory viral load may be a critical
determinant of disease severity, in line with the observations made amongst physicians caring
for COVID-19, wherein those with greatest droplet exposure either through endotracheal

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

intubation (respiratory therapists, anesthesiologists, and emergency room doctors) or
otherwise (dentists, ENT and ophthalmologists) had the highest rates of mortality (Ing et al.,
2020; Nguyen et al., 2020). Indeed, as reported in the current SARS-CoV-2 mouse models,
we find that the level of viral load is a key determinant of disease in the MHV-A59 model.

In our model, the trajectory of disease in mice receiving high respiratory inoculum is respiratory
failure. However, in lower doses of viral inoculum this was no longer observed. Indeed, using
an LD50 dose of MHV-A59, we found that death did not correlate with hypoxemia. Rather,
disease trajectory seemed to be determined by viral dissemination and extrapulmonary multiorgan inflammation and damage. It is now well-recognized that SARS-CoV-2 is widely
detectable in multiple tissues; our findings are in-line with recently reported human autopsy
series of COVID-19 patients, where there is variable expression of virus in lung, heart, liver,
brain, and blood (Puelles et al., 2020). Interestingly, the pattern of viral dissemination did not
correlate tightly with entry receptor expression, as is also observed with ACE2 and SARSCoV-2. CEACAM1, like ACE2, is also expressed on endothelial cells and monocytes (Ergun
et al., 2000; Hamming et al., 2004), and it is likely that bulk-level detection of these entry
receptors, as was done in this study, lacks the necessary resolution to capture this aspect of
cellular infectivity which may underly the mechanism of dissemination. Nonetheless, our
studies using LD50 doses indicate that despite relatively preserved lung function,
extrapulmonary inflammation mediated by viral dissemination to extrapulmonary tissues may
represent a common pathophysiological mechanism of action that accounts for the wide
heterogeneity in disease trajectories observed in respiratory SARS-CoV-2 infections in
humans and respiratory MHV-A59 infections in mice. In line with the importance of viral control,
and consistent with all SARS-CoV-2 animal models to date, MHV-A59 infection also generates
long-lasting and serum-transferable protective immunity to subsequent LD100 challenges.

From this perspective, it is likely that the degree of type-I interferon response, which could
vary as a function of genetics and other host characteristics, is another major determinant in
disease trajectories in SARS-CoV-2. Since IFNAR signaling primes and amplifies
inflammatory responses, it is both involved in immunopathologic responses as was observed
in the SARS-CoV-2 model employed by the Iwasaki group (Israelow et al., 2020) as well as
viral control, as was observed in the model used by the Perlman group (Hassan et al., 2020;
Sun et al., 2020a). Decreased Type-I IFN response has been correlated with increased
disease severity in human SARS-CoV-2 patients (Hadjadj et al., 2020). We found that IFNAR
deficiency led to profound viral dissemination. In this model, type-I interferon was absolutely

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

required for extrapulmonary viral control. In the MHV-A59 model, despite high viral loads in
certain organs, like the liver and heart, expected commensurate damage and inflammation
was not detected using the method we employed in this study. It is possible that this may
reflect the dual roles of IFNAR signaling, where it prevents viral propagation but can come at
the expense of immunopathology. Conversely, impaired IFNAR1 signaling may reduce
immunopathology at the expense of viral burden. Interestingly, IFNAR1-deficient animals did
not succumb to hypoxic respiratory failure but rather to an inability to maintain autonomic
control in the setting of pronounced CNS viral load and inflammation.

Neurologic involvement in COVID-19 is becoming an increasingly recognized manifestation.
More than 36 percent of COVID-19 patients displayed neurologic manifestations (Montalvan
et al., 2020). These include hyposmia as a characteristic and dominant feature but also include
frank encephalitis, including involvement of the cardiorespiratory centers, which may bely the
autonomic dysfunction observed in patients. In our study, we find that MHV-A59 can be readily
detected in various parts of the brain following respiratory inoculation, including areas known
to be critical for cardiorespiratory control, despite poor expression of the entry receptor, much
like what is observed in SARS-CoV. We find evidence of autonomic dysregulation at all doses
tested of MHV-A59 led to an impaired heart rate response to infection, and this exacerbated
in the context of IFNAR-deficiency, and may have contributed to death in these animals. We
cannot exclude a component of adrenal insufficiency to the impaired HR response, or the
development of cardiac contractile dysfunction related to cytokine activation or endothelial
injury with impaired myocardial perfusion. The mechanisms underlying neuronal invasion is a
long-standing mystery in the study of neurotropic betacoronaviruses (Miura et al., 2008;
Perlman et al., 1989; Phillips and Weiss, 2011) and the immune and tissue responses in these
privileged tissues remain to be elucidated.

Finally, we demonstrate that early control of viral replication with interferon b or convalescent
serum significantly improves MHV-A59-induced mortality, while no benefit was shown with
treatment at a later course. While we did not demonstrate a clear role for type-III interferon in
our current study, DKO animals demonstrated relatively more severe disease. Overall, the
role of type-I interferon was dominant in these studies, and it remains to be seen if treatment
with type-III interferon would play a protective role when using i.e. LD50 doses. Our findings
resonate with the general experience in human trials where the intervention timepoint within
the disease trajectory is a critical determinant of the therapeutic response. Thus, in the
absence of biomarkers that can specify when a patient was infected or where they lie along

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

their disease course, it will be challenging to design immunomodulatory or antiviral
therapeutics in COVID-19, unless clinical targets emerge that are overwhelmingly protective
regardless of the patient’s infection duration or their particular clinical constellation. From this
perspective and based on the growing appreciation for viral dissemination to be a major
pathogenic driver in many COVID-19 disease endophenotypes, rapid and concerted
development of antiviral therapeutics represents an urgent and relatively unmet need.

We describe a BSL2 model for studying COVID-19 pathophysiology using mouse
betacoronavirus MHV-A59. Our model captures the diverse disease trajectories seen in
COVID-19 ranging from relatively asymptomatic to multiorgan involvement to respiratory
failure as a function of inoculating dose and host characteristics (Figure 5). Further expedited
academic and biopharmaceutical research and development on COVID-19 disease
pathogenesis and pathophysiology are critical to the ongoing global therapeutic effort. The
BSL2 platform presented in this report may be a useful addition to the current armamentarium
of research tools.

Limitations of Study
The MHV-A59 model will not capture SARS-CoV-2-intrinsic host-pathogen interactions that
may be pathogenic in COVID-19. Despite viral homology and entry-receptor similarities and
the pathophysiologic similarities between MHV-A59-induced disease and COVID-19, this
model will not capture all aspects of COVID-19. These experiments were performed in a single
facility (albeit in several different animal rooms in several different laboratories within Yale),
and on the C57Bl6/J background. Thus, the impact of microbiota and other facility-specific
features are unknown. MHV-A59 preparations were done in the Wilen, Wang, and Compton
laboratories and batch-to-batch variability will likely occur due to mutations and genetic drifts
during viral propagation. The translatability of this study to humans is to be determined.

Acknowledgments
We thank the Wang, Dela Cruz, Dixit, Pereira, Ring, and Wilen Labs for valuable discussions.
We thank Yawen Jiang for technical assistance. We thank the Immunobiology and Internal
Medicine Departments for solidarity in the Yale COVID-19 research effort. We thank Drs.
Ruslan Medzhitov and Akiko Iwasaki for critical review of the manuscript.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The Wang lab is supported in part by NIH grant 1K08AI128745 and by generous gifts from the
Pew Charitable Trusts, Knights of Columbus, G. Harold and Leila Y. Mathers Charitable
Foundation, and the Ludwig Family Foundation. The Dela Cruz lab is in part supported by NIH
grant HL126094, VA BX004661, DOD and Parker B. Francis award. The Dixit lab is supported
in part by NIH grants P01AG051459, AR070811 and Cure Alzheimers Fund. The Pereira lab
is supported in part by NIH grant AI113040. Lokesh Sharma is supported by a Parker B
Francis Fellowship. The Wilen lab is supported by NIH grant K08AI128043, R01AI48467,
Burroughs Wellcome Fund, Fast Grants, the Ludwig Family Foundation, and G. Harold and
Leila Y. Mathers Charitable Foundation. The Young lab is supported in part by NIH grants
HL150449 and HL 148344. Anush Swaminathan is supported by NIH Medical Scientist
Training Program Training Grant T32GM136651.

Author Contributions
AW, HQ, CDC, and LS conceived the project and wrote the manuscript with assistance from
AS, JT, and KIW. BH propagated MHV-A59 with input from SC and CW, and also performed
experiments with HQ. HQ and BH performed experiments establishing and characterizing the
model system. AR contributed to the MHV-A59 model generation. LS and HQ performed
experiments related to IFNAR knockouts with assistance from XP, LW and VH. SR in the
laboratory of VD assisted in experiments. SK provided IFNLR-/- mice and guidance for the
study. JP generated experiments related to gender differences. CZ and XP maintain animals
for the Wang and Dela Cruz Labs, respectively. DL generated the ssRNASeq analyses of
hypothalamus. CJB, a mouse pathologist, generated the images presented in Figure 1 and
Supplemental Figure S2 and interpreted them; all other histolopathology figures and
interpretations presented were done by others. XT and SI assisted in interpreting renal
histology. YM and LY assisted in performing and interpreting cardiac histology.

Declaration of Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Figure Legend
Figure 1. Respiratory MHV-A59 infection leads to severe clinical disease and
immunological memory. (A) Survival rate, (B) Percentage of body weight change, (C)
Oxygen saturation from C57BL6/J mice intranasally inoculated with MHV-A59 at indicated

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

PFU. (D) Quantification of viral load via PFU assay from the left upper pulmonary lobe. Values
were

log10

transformed.

N.D.

non-detectable.

(E)

Representative

images

of

immunohistochemistry staining of lungs from C57BL6/J mice infected with MHV-A59 at
indicated doses or Mock control (PBS). Black arrows demonstrated foci of alveolar
inflammation, green arrowheads indicated MHV syncytia. B = Airway Bronchi; TB = terminal
bronchiole; PA = pulmonary artery. (F) Kinetics of serum MHV-A59-specific IgG from
C57BL6/J mice infected with unlethal dose of MHV-A59 or Mock control. (G) Schematic of
rechallenge experiment. C57BL6/J mice were rechallenged with a lethal dose three weeks
post the first infection of MHV-A59 at LD0, LD50, or a Mock control. (H) Survival rate, (I)
Percentage of body weight change of convalescent mice rechallenged with the lethal MHVA59. Data represented two independent experiments, 5 mice per group for each experiment.
dpi, days post infection. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Dunnett test was
applied for multiple groups statistical calculation. Results were presented as mean ± SEM.
ns, not significant, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001, ****p<0.0001.

Figure 2. Respiratory MHV-A59 infection causes systemic inflammation and multiorgan
damage associated with viral dissemination. (A) Oxygen saturation from surviving or
deceased C57BL6/J mice on 3 or 6 days post MHV-A59 infection at LD50. (B) Quantification
of lymphocytes (LYM), (C) platelets (PLT) in the circulation of MHV-A59 infected mice. (D)
Serum levels of alanine transaminase (ALT), (E) Cardiac troponin I, (F) Interleukin 6 (IL-6),
(G) Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-a), (H) Interferon alpha (IFN-a), (I) Interferon beta (IFNb) from C57BL6/J mice inoculated with MHV-A59 at LD50. (J-K) Heat map of transcriptional
expressions of Ceacam1, MHV-A59, Ifnb, Mx1, Viperin (Vip), and Tnfa in tissues from LD50challenged C57BL6/J mice on 3dpi and 6dpi. Viral load was indicated by relative expression
of MHV-A59 compared with 18s gene given the undetectable values from mock controls.
Ceacam1, Ifnb, Mx, Viperin, and Tnfa were presented as fold increase relative to mock
controls. Each cell presented the mean of 8 to 12 replicates from two independent experiments.
Undetectable values were shown in silver color. Hypo, hypothalamus. FB, forebrain. MB,
midbrain. HB, hindbrain. Data represents two independent experiments, 4 to 6 mice per group
for each experiment. dpi, days post infection. Two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple
comparisons test was applied for statistical calculation. Results are presented as mean ± SEM.
ns, not significant, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001, ****p<0.0001.

Figure 3. Absence of the type-I Interferon receptor during respiratory MHV-A59
infection results in viremia and mortality. (A) Survival rate, (B) Percentage of body weight

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

change from respiratory MHV-A59 infection mice with deletion of IFNAR (Ifnar-/-), IFNLR (Ifnlr/-), or double knockout (DKO), and wildtype (WT) controls. MHV-A59 were inoculated
intranasally at an unlethal dose (LD0) tested from C57BL6/J mice. (C) Survival rate from
respiratory MHV-A59 infection mice with myeloid cell specific deletion of IFNAR (Ifnar f/f DLysM )
or littermate controls (Ifnar f/f). (D) Oxygen saturation, (E) 50% tissue culture infectious doses
(TCID50) of the virus in the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) from Ifnar-/-, Ifnlr-/-, DKO, or WT
mice measured 3 days post inoculation of MHV-A59 at LD0. (F) Representative images of
immunohistochemistry staining of lungs from indicated mice on 3dpi with LD0 MHV-A59
infection. (G) Serum levels of IL-6, (H) TNF-a, (I) IL-1b on 3dpi from indicated mice infected
with LD0 MHV-A59. (J) Heat map of transcriptional expressions of MHV-A59, (K)Tnfa, and (L)
Il6 in tissues from LD0-challenged mice on 3dpi. Data were plotted as fold changes of
expression of MHV-A59, Tnfa, and Il6 from interferon receptor knockout mice relative to WT
controls. The ratio of MHV-A59 expression between genetically modified mice and WT
controls were log2 transformed and presented in logarithmic scale. Each cell is a mean of 1215 replicates from two independent experiments. Data represents two independent
experiments, 4 to 6 mice per group for each experiment. dpi, days post infection. One-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Dunnett test was applied for multiple groups
statistical calculation. Results are presented as mean ± SEM. ns, not significant, *p<0.05,
**p<0.01, ***p<0.001, ****p<0.0001.

Figure 4. Type-I interferon receptor deficiency reveals vulnerability to CNS metastasis
and failure of autonomic control. (A) Serum levels of alanine transaminase (ALT), (B)
Cardiac troponin I, and (C) Heart rate (HR) from genetical modified or wildtype mice on 3 dpi
with intranasal inoculation of MHV-A59 at LD0. (D) Heat map of transcriptional expressions of
MHV-A59, (E) Tnfa, and (F) Il6 in tissues from LD0-challenged mice on 3dpi. Data were plotted
as fold changes of relative expression of MHV-A59, Tnfa, and Il6 from interferon receptor
knockout mice with respect to that from WT controls. The ratio of MHV-A59 expression
between genetically modified mice and WT were log2 transformed and presented in logarithmic
scale. Each cell presented mean of 10 replicates from two independent experiments. Hypo,
hypothalamus. FB, forebrain. MB, midbrain. HB, hindbrain. (G-H) Survival rate of C57BL6/J
mice intranasally inoculated with lethal MHV-A59 at LD100 followed by (G) early or (H) late
treatment of interferon-b (IFN-b). IFN-b was applied at 12 and 24 hours post infection for early
phase, or at 24 and 36 hours post infection for late phase treatment. Arrows indicated the
timepoints for IFN-b intratracheal application. (I) 50% tissue culture infectious doses (TCID50)
of the virus in the bronchoalveoar lavage (BAL), relative expression of MHV-A59 in (J) the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

lung and (K) the liver from MHV-A59 infected mice received early IFN-b treatment as indicated
in (G). Data represent two independent experiments, 5 to 6 mice per group for each
experiment. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Dunnett test for multiple
groups, or unpaired t-test for two groups was applied respectively for statistical calculation.
Results are presented as mean ± SEM. ns, not significant, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001,
****p<0.0001.

Figure 5. Respiratory MHV-A59 infection captures the diverse disease trajectories of
COVID-19 (A) Homology of MHV-A59 and SARS-CoV-2 that presents organotropism beyond
the respiratory system and causes multi-organ dysfunction in COVID-19 patients. The x-axis
indicates the incidence of organ injury denoted in the y-axis in COVID positive patients, and
the size of circles correlates with the prevalence in severe COVID-19 patients. (B) Illustration
of the effect of viral load and host defense on different disease trajectories. High viral inoculum
leads to death from ARDS and hypoxemic respiratory failure. At LD0 and LD50 inoculums,
patterns of organ involvement emerge, likely as a function of viral metastasis. In the context
of IFNAR-deficiency, vulnerability in the brain for viral metastasis and its consequences on
autonomic control are revealed.

Supplementary Figures
Figure S1 (Related to Figure 1). Homology between MHV-A59 and hSARS-CoV-2.
Related to Figure 1. (A) Phylogenetic clade (IBV (avian coronavirus); BCoV (bovine
coronavirus); HCoV (human coronavirus); PDCoV (porcine coronavirus)) and (B) genomic
structures of human SARS-CoV-2 and MHV-A59. (C) Peptide sequence homology between
human SARS-CoV-2 and MHV-A59. (D) Transcriptional expression of Ace2 and Ceacam1 in
tissues from normal C57BL6/J mice. (E) Heat map of relative expression of Ace2 and
Ceacam1 in tissues from C57BL6/J mice with intranasal MHV-A59 inoculation on 3 dpi. Ratio
of gene expression between that from infected mice on 3 dpi and relative to that from mock
controls. Each cell presented is a mean of 5 to 8 replicates from two independent experiments.
Undetectable values are depicted as gray cells.

Figure S2 (Related to Figure 1). MHV-A59 infection leads to severe clinical disease and
immunological memory specific to the same species, Related to Figure 1. (A) Food
intake, (B) Core body temperature, (C) Heart rate, (D) Breath rate, and (E) Pulse distension
from C57BL6/J mice intranasally inoculated with MHV-A59 at indicated PFU. (F)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Representative HE (low power, higher power inset) from multiple C57Bl/6J male mice
inoculated with intranasal (IN) PBS or MHVA59 (LD0 or LD100) that were necropsied at 3, 5, or
6 days post inoculation (dpi). Mock infected mice largely lacked pathologic findings except for
mild bronchiolitis with mild perivascular/peribronchial(iolar) PV/PB edema (**) with a mild
inflammatory (arrow) response, most consistent with aspiration, since the same animals also
lacked pathologic changes in the liver or brain. In contrast, mice given MHV-A59 vary from
none to varying degrees of PV/PB edema (**) at all doses and dpi. Alveoli vary in the presence
and extent of hemorrhage (*) with more severe alveolar hemorrhage observed mice given
lethal doses of MHVA59. Regardless of dose or dpi, MHVA59 mice demonstrate foci of
alveolar inflammation (black arrows) with neutrophils within alveoli (blue arrowheads). Mice
given a LD100 dose have multiple foci of fibrin (black arrowheads), hemorrhage and edema,
with varying severity of lung lesions. MHV syncytia (green arrowheads) are observed as well
as edema (*). * = alveolar hemorrhage; **= perivascular and/or peribronchial(iolar) edema; B
= Airway Bronchi; TB = terminal bronchiole; PA = pulmonary artery; PV - pulmonary vein;
arrows - alveolar hemorrhage; blue arrowhead - neutrophils in alveoli; green arrowheads MHV Syncytial cells; black arrowheads - fibrin, hemorrhage, edema. (G) Survival rate of males
comparing with females of C57BL6/J mice. (H) Kinetics of serum MHV-A59-specific IgM, (I)
IgA from C57BL6/J mice infected with unlethal dose of MHV-A59 or Mock control. (J) Serum
levels of indicated immunoglobulins on 14 dpi from C57BL6/J mice infected with unlethal dose
of MHV-A59 or Mock control. (K) Food intake of survivors from MHV-A59 infection at LD0,
LD50, or the mock control when they were rechallenged with a lethal dose of MHV-A59 three
weeks later. (L) Schematic of survivors from MHV-A59 (MHV) infection challenged with
influenza A virus (IAV) 3 weeks later. (M) Percentage of body weight change, (N) food intake
of survivors from MHV-A59 infection challenged with IAV as indicated in (L). (O) Survival rate,
(P) Percentage of body weight change from C57BL6/J mice intranasally inoculated with lethal
IAV, combined with an unlethal MHV-A59 or a mock control. (Q) White blood cells (WBC), (R)
Monocytes (MONO), (S) Granulocytes (GRAN), and (T) Percentage of WBC subtypes from
C57BL6/J mice infected with MHV-A59 at indicated timepoint. (U) Splenomegaly (spleen
weight, and representative picture) at 6 dpi from intranasally MHV-A59 infected C57BL6/J
mice. Five mice per group for every experiment. Two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s
multiple comparisons test, or unpaired t-test for two groups was applied respectively for
statistical calculation. Results were presented as mean ± SEM. dpi, days post infection.

Figure S3 (Related to Figure 2). Respiratory MHV-A59 inoculation causes systemic
inflammation and multiorgan damages associated with viral dissemination, Related to
Figure 2. (A) Heart rate (HR), breath rate, and pulse distension from survivors or deceased

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

C57BL6/J mice on 3 or 5 days post intranasal inoculation of MHV-A59 at LD50. (B) Heat map
of transcriptional expressions of MHV-A59 in tissues from C57BL6/J mice 3 days post
intranasally inoculated with MHV-A59 at LD0 or LD50. Viral load was presented as relative
expression of MHV-A59 with log2 transformation. Each cell presented mean of 8 to 10
replicates from two independent experiments. Undetectable values were shown in silver color.
Transcriptional expression of (C) Tnfa, and Il6 in tissues from C57BL6/J mice with intranasal
MHV-A59 infection at LD50 at indicated time. Transcriptional expression of MHV-A59, type I
interferon (Ifnb), interferon stimulated genes (Mx1, Viperin, Pkr), type III interferon (Il28, Il29),
Ifnar in (D-E) the lung and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), (F-G) liver, (H-I) heart, (J-K) four
regions of brain, (L) spleen, (M) kidney from C57BL6/J mice with intranasal MHV-A59 infection
at LD50 at indicated time. Hypo, hypothalamus. FB, forebrain. MB, midbrain. HB, hindbrain.
dpi, days post infection. Date represented two independent experiment, 5 mice per group for
every experiment. Two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test for
statistical calculation of panel (A). One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Dunnett
test for multiple groups comparation of panel (C – N). Groups in (C, J and N) without labeling
indicates no significant difference. Results were presented as mean ± SEM. ns, not significant,
*p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001, ****p<0.0001.

Figure S4 (Related Figure 3). Absence of type I interferon response during respiratory
MHV-A59 infection results in viremia and mortality, Related to Figure 3. (A) Survival rate
of males comparing with females of IFNAR knockout (Ifnar1 -/-) mice. (B) Survival rate of
Ifnar1 -/- comparing with double knockout of IFNAR and IFNLR (DKO) mice inoculated with
MHV-A59 at 100 PFU (100 dilution of LD0). (C) white blood cells (WBC), red blood cells (RBC),
and platelet (PLT) in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) from IFNAR (Ifnar-1/-), IFNLR (Ifnlr-/-), or
double knockout (DKO), and wildtype (WT) mice infected with LD0 MHV-A59 on 3 dpi. (D)
Serum levels of MHV-A59 specific IgA, IgG, and IgM from Ifnar1-/-, Ifnlr-/-, or DKO mice, and
WT controls 3 days post respiratory MHV-A59 infection. (E-K) Transcriptional expression of
MHV-A59, (L-S) Tnfa and Il6 in the indicated tissues from Ifnar1-/-, Ifnlr-/-, DKO, and WT mice
infected with LD0 MHV-A59 on 3 dpi. Quantification of Data represented two independent
experiment, 5-6 mice per group for every experiment. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
followed by Dunnett test for multiple groups comparation. Goups in (D,E, L, and M) without
labeling indicates no significant difference. Results were presented as mean ± SEM. ns, not
significant, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001, ****p<0.0001.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure S5 (Related to Figure 4). Deficiency of type I interferon response promotes brain
invasion following MHV-A59 respiratory infection, Related to Figure 4. (A) Gene
expression of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), a marker of heart failure, and neutrophil
gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), a marker for post-ischemic injury of kidney, in the
heart and kidney respectively harvested on 3 days post MHV-A59 infection at LD0 of indicated
knockout mice. (B) Representative images of H&E staining of the liver from indicated mice
on 3dpi with LD0 MHV-A59 infection. (C) Representative images of F4/80 immunostaining of
heart from same animals of (B). Positive staining is red, indicated by the arrows. Quantification
of cells with positive staining was shown on the right. (D) Quantification of blood cells, (E)
oxygen saturation, (F) heart rate, (G) breath rate, and (H) pulse distension from Ifnar1-/-, Ifnlr/-, DKO, and WT mice infected with LD0 MHV-A59 on 3 dpi. (I) Cell clusters of mouse Ace2,
Ceacam1, and Tmprss2 in hypothalamus from normal C57BL6/J mice using single-cell RNA
sequencing analysis. (J) Survival rate of C57BL6/J mice intranasally inoculated with lethal
MHV-A59 at LD100 followed by early interferon-l (IFN-l) treatment. Arrows indicated the
timepoints (12 and 24 hours post infection) for IFN-l intratracheal application. (K) Survival
rate of C57BL6/J mice intranasally inoculated with lethal MHV-A59 at LD100 followed by
convalescent serum treatment, normal serum as the control. Arrows indicated the timepoints
(1 dpi) for intravenous serum injection. (L) Percentage of body weight change of C57BL6/J
mice intranasally inoculated with unlethal MHV-A59 followed by convalescent serum treatment,
normal serum and PBS as controls. Arrows indicated the timepoints (1 dpi) for intravenous
injection of serums or PBS. Transcriptional expression of MHV-A59 in (M) the lung and (N)
the liver on 3 dpi from C57BL6/J mice received convalescent or normal serum treatment 1 day
after MHV-A59 respiratory infection. (O) Survival rate of Ifnar1-/- mice received convalescent
serum intravenous injection right before intranasal MHV-A59 inoculation at LD0. Normal
serum as the control. Arrows indicated the timepoint for intravenous serum injection. Data
represented two independent experiment, 5-6 mice per group for every experiment. One-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Dunnett test for multiple groups comparation.
Results were presented as mean ± SEM. ns, not significant, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001,
****p<0.0001.

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Mice
Young adult mice with age between 7 to 12 weeks were used. C57BL/6J, IFNAR1-/-, LysMCre,
IFNARf/f animals were purchased from Jackson Laboratories. INFLR-/- were obtained from
Sergei Kotenko. All animals were bred and maintained at Yale University. All animal

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

experiments were performed according to institutional regulations upon review and approval
of Yale University’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Viral infections were performed in a biosafety level 2 (BSL2) facility and all experiments were
done during the light period. Mice were intranasally inoculated with MHV-A59 following
anesthesia with ketamine/xylazine cocktail. LD50 (Lethal Dose 50%) for every new stock of
virus was tested in male young adult C57BL/6J mice, then PFU assay was applied using L2
cells infected with the same virus at ten-fold serial dilutions. In the current study, LD50 of MHVA59 for young male C57BL/6J mice were between 10,000 and 160,000 PFU. All doses (LD100,
LD50, and LD0) indicated here were referred to those tested from young male C57BL/6J mice.
LD50 dose of MHV-A59 was uniformly applied to C57BL/6J mice except for the survival and
rescue experiments; LD0 dose of MHV-A59 was applied to interferon deficiency mice as well
as the wildtype controls because of their susceptibility to viral infection.
For rescue experiments, 1 µg interferon b or interferon l (R & D Systems) in PBS with a total
volume of 50 µl was intratracheally administrated to C57BL/6J mice challenged with lethal
dose of MHV-A59 intranasally. Interferon treatments were applied at 12 and 24 hours or 36
and 48 hours post viral infection, respectively referring to the early or late course of disease.
Convalescent serums were collected from survived mice at three weeks post MHV-A59
infection. Control serums were collected from normal healthy C57BL/6J mice. Serum
treatments were applied through intravenous injection at 100ul per mouse 24 hours post viral
infection for C57BL/6J mice or 10 minutes before viral infection for INFAR-/- mice respectively.
Vital signs, including blood oxygen saturation, breath rate, and heart rate post intranasal
MHV-A59 inoculation were monitored via pulse oximetry using the MouseOx Plus (Starr Life
Sciences Corp.). Core body temperature was measured by rectal probe thermometry
(Physitemp TH-5 Thermalert).
Virus
Recombinant murine coronavirus MHV-A59 were purchased from BEI resources (NR43000), and were grown in BV2 cells. Viral titrations were tested using PFU assay in L2 cells
infected with MHV-A59 at 10-fold serial dilutions.
METHOD DETAILS
Quantification of Plasma Cytokines

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Plasma concentrations of IL-6, TNF-a and IL-1b were assayed by sandwich ELISA method.
Recombinant, IL-6 (406-ML, R&D), TNF-a (410-MY, R&D) and IL-1b (401-ML-010, R&D) were
utilized as standards with the highest concentration at 10ng/ml. Capture antibodies were antiIL-6 (14-7061-85, eBioscience), anti-TNF-a (14-7423-85, eBioscience) and anti-IL-1b (147012-81, Invitrogen). Detection antibodies conjugated with biotin were anti-mouse-IL-6
(554402, BD Pharmingen), anti-mouse TNF-a (13-7349-81, Invitrogen) and anti-mouse IL-1b
(13-7112-85, eBioscience). Following the incubation with HRP-conjugated streptavidin
(554066, BD Biosciences) and TMB substrate reagent (555214, BD Biosciences), color of the
plates were closely monitored every minute and plates were read at 450nm instantly after the
addition of stop solution (1N HCL). Interferon-a and Interferon-b measurements were
performed per protocols from manufacturers.
Quantification of Serum MHV-A59 specific immunoglobulins
Heat inactivated sera were assayed for immunoglobulins by ELISA in plates coated with 4^5
PFU/well of MHV-A59 viruses that were diluted in 100ul sodium carbonate buffer (PH 8.0). 1ul
serum for IgGs and IgM measurements, or 5ul serum for IgA measurement diluted in PBS
with 1%BSA to a total volume of 100ul per well were incubate at 4oC overnight. Plates were
afterwards incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary goat anti-mouse IgGs, IgM, or IgA
antibodies (abcam) with 10,000 dilution in PBS with 1% BSA. TMB substrate reagent and stop
solution were the same as those for cytokine detection. Plates were read at 450nm and 570nm.
Quantification of Organ Injury Markers and Hematology Analysis
Cardiac Troponin-I (CTNI) concentration and Alanine Aminotransferase (ALT) activity in the
blood were measured by kits per manufacturers’ instructions (Life Diagnostics and Cayman
Chemical, respectively). 50ul of whole blood per mouse were collected via retro-orbital
bleeding in heparin coated tubes then counted immediately using HemaTrue (HESK).
Virus Titration
Virus titration was analyzed as previous described (Leibowitz et al., 2011). Briefly, 90%
confluent L2 cells were infected with 10-fold serial dilutions of MHV-A59 virus. After one-hour
incubation, each well was overlaid with 1:1 mixture of growth median and 1.2% Avicel for four
days. Cells were then fixed and stained with crystal violet, and plaques were enumerated in
triplicated.
Quantification of Viral Load

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Viral load in the tissue were quantified using q-PCR, PFU or TCID50 in the current study.
Primers to amplify nucleocapsid protein of MHV-A59 were used to quantify viral RNA. Viral
load were presented as the relative expression comparing with housekeeping gene 18s.
Upper left pulmonary lobe was uniformly applied for PFU assay. 10-fold serial dilutions of
homogenized lung tissue were incubated with L2 cells, then plaque stain was performed
after 48 hours incubation. TCID50 were performed by infecting serial dilutions of BAL
samples onto L2 monolayers and incubated for 48 hours. Cells were then stained with
crystal violet to determine the dilution that is sufficient to kill the cells.
qRT-PCR
Tissues were homogenized in 1ml RNA-Bee (Tel-Test, Inc) using a FastPrep-24 5G
homogenizer (MP Biomedicals). RNA was purified using QIAGEN RNeasy columns according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA was generated with reverse transcriptase (Clontech)
using oligo-dT6 primers (Sigma-Aldrich). qRT-PCR was performed on a CFX96 Real-Time
System (Bio-Rad) using PerfeCTa SYBR Green SuperMix (Quanta Biosciences). Relative
expression units were calculated as transcript levels of target genes relative to 18s. Primers
used for qRT-PCR are listed in Table S1.
Immunohistochemistry
Mice were euthanized and perfused with PBS or fixative. All tissues were afterwards
immersion-fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin. Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E), or Martius,
Scarlet and Blue (MSB) staining was applied, then slides were assessed by a blinded
pathologist.
Single-cell RNA sequencing
Sequence data was obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus, accession code GSE74672
(Romanov et al., 2017). Expression matrix combined with metadata were loaded into Seurat
v3.0 (Butler et al., 2018). Feature distribution and filtering (nFeature_RNA > 200 &
nFeature_RNA < 2500) were performed with FeatureScatter and subset functions. Then,
data normalization, assignment of variable genes and scaling were performed with Seurat's
NormalizeData, FindVariableFeatures and ScaleData functions, respectively. Dimensionality
reduction was performed with RunPCA function and significant dimensions were evaluated
with ElbowPlot and JackStrawPlot. Clustering of cells was performed with Seurat's
FindNeighbors (dims=1:30) and FindClusters (resolution=0.8) functions, while optimal
cluster resolution was determined using clustree (Zappia and Oshlack, 2018). Finally, UMAP
was performed with Seurat's RunUMAP function (dims =1:30) and gene expression of
features of interest were visualized with FeaturePlot function.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical analyses were performed using Prism 8.0 (GraphPad Software, Inc.). Student’s t
test was used for two groups comparison. More than two groups were compared using oneway analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Dunnett test. Samples at different time points
from multiple groups were analyzed using two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey test. A p value
less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM.
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001, **** p<0.0001

Table S1. Primers for qRT-PCR, Related to Key Resources Table
Ceacam1 Forward (5’ - 3’)

ATTTCACGGGGCAAGCATACA

Ceacam1 Reverse (5’ - 3’)

GTCACCCTCCACGGGATTG

Ace2 Forward (5’ – 3’)

TGGGCAAACTCTATGCTG

Ace2 Reverse (5’ – 3’)

TTCATTGGCTCCGTTTCTTA

MHV-A59 Forward (5’ – 3’)

CAGATCCTTGATGATGGCGTAGT

MHV-A59 Reverse (5’ – 3’)

AGAGTGTCCTATCCCGACTTTCTC

Ifnb Forward (5’ – 3’)

AGCTCCAAGAAAGGACGAACA

Ifnb Reverse (5’ – 3’)

GCCCTGTAGGTGAGGTTGAT

Il28 Forward (5’ – 3’)

AGTGGAAGCAAAGGATTG

Il28 Reverse (5’ – 3’)

GAGATGAGGTGGGAACTG

Bnp Forward (5’ – 3’)

AGGTGCTGTCCCAGATGATT

Bnp Reverse (5’ – 3’)

CCTTGGTCCTTCAAGAGCTG

Ngal Forward (5’ – 3’)

CAAGCAATACTTCAAAATTACCCTGTA

Ngal Reverse (5’ – 3’)

GCAAAGCGGGTGAAACGTT

Mx1 Forward (5’ – 3’)

TCCTCCCCAAATGTTTTCAG

Mx1 Reverse (5’ – 3’)

ACTGAGATGACCCAGCACCT

Viperin Forward (5’ – 3’)

TCAGGGCCTTGATGTGTTCA

Viperin Reverse (5’ – 3’)

TCTTGCTATCTCCTGCGACA

Pkr Forward (5’ – 3’)

AACTCTTCACACGTGCTTC

Pkr Reverse (5’ – 3’)

CATTCAGCCAAGGTCTTCAG

Tnfa Forward (5’ – 3’)

TCTGTCTACTGAACTTCGGGGTG

Tnfa Reverse (5’ – 3’)

ACTTGGTGGTTTGCTACGACG

Il6 Forward (5’ – 3’)

TGAACAACGATGATGCACTTG

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Il6 Reverse (5’ – 3’)

CTGAAGGACTCTGGCTTTGTC

Ifnar1 Forward (5’ – 3’)

AGCGTCTGGAAATACCTGTGTC

Ifnar1 Reverse (5’ – 3’)

CTCAGCCGTCAGAAGTACAAGG

18s Forward (5’ – 3’)

GCAATTATTCCCCATGAACG

18s Reverse (5’ – 3’)

AGGGCCTCACTAAACCATCC

References

Bao, L., Deng, W., Huang, B., Gao, H., Liu, J., Ren, L., Wei, Q., Yu, P., Xu, Y., Qi, F., et al.
(2020). The pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 in hACE2 transgenic mice. Nature 583, 830-833.
Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E., and Satija, R. (2018). Integrating singlecell transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and species. Nat Biotechnol
36, 411-420.
Cervantes-Barragan, L., Kalinke, U., Zust, R., Konig, M., Reizis, B., Lopez-Macias, C.,
Thiel, V., and Ludewig, B. (2009). Type I IFN-mediated protection of macrophages and
dendritic cells secures control of murine coronavirus infection. J Immunol 182, 1099-1106.
Chan, J.F., Zhang, A.J., Yuan, S., Poon, V.K., Chan, C.C., Lee, A.C., Chan, W.M., Fan, Z.,
Tsoi, H.W., Wen, L., et al. (2020). Simulation of the clinical and pathological manifestations
of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in golden Syrian hamster model: implications for
disease pathogenesis and transmissibility. Clin Infect Dis.
Compton, S.R., Ball-Goodrich, L.J., Johnson, L.K., Johnson, E.A., Paturzo, F.X., and Macy,
J.D. (2004). Pathogenesis of enterotropic mouse hepatitis virus in immunocompetent and
immunodeficient mice. Comp Med 54, 681-689.
Compton, S.R., Stephensen, C.B., Snyder, S.W., Weismiller, D.G., and Holmes, K.V. (1992).
Coronavirus species specificity: murine coronavirus binds to a mouse-specific epitope on its
carcinoembryonic antigen-related receptor glycoprotein. J Virol 66, 7420-7428.
Coronaviridae Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of, V. (2020). The
species Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus: classifying 2019-nCoV and
naming it SARS-CoV-2. Nat Microbiol 5, 536-544.
DeAlbuquerque, N., Baig, E., Xuezhong, M., Shalev, I., Phillips, M.J., Habal, M., Leibowitz,
J., McGilvray, I., Butany, J., Fish, E., et al. (2006). Murine hepatitis virus strain 1 as a model
for severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (SARS). Adv Exp Med Biol 581, 373-378.
DeBiasi, R.L., Song, X., Delaney, M., Bell, M., Smith, K., Pershad, J., Ansusinha, E., Hahn,
A., Hamdy, R., Harik, N., et al. (2020). Severe Coronavirus Disease-2019 in Children and
Young Adults in the Washington, DC, Metropolitan Region. J Pediatr 223, 199-203 e191.
Dery, K.J., Kujawski, M., Grunert, D., Wu, X., Ngyuen, T., Cheung, C., Yim, J.H., and
Shively, J.E. (2014). IRF-1 regulates alternative mRNA splicing of carcinoembryonic
antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 1 (CEACAM1) in breast epithelial cells generating an
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motif (ITIM) containing isoform. Mol Cancer 13,
64.
Ergun, S., Kilik, N., Ziegeler, G., Hansen, A., Nollau, P., Gotze, J., Wurmbach, J.H., Horst,
A., Weil, J., Fernando, M., et al. (2000). CEA-related cell adhesion molecule 1: a potent
angiogenic factor and a major effector of vascular endothelial growth factor. Mol Cell 5, 311320.
Farmer, D.G., Dutschmann, M., Paton, J.F., Pickering, A.E., and McAllen, R.M. (2016).
Brainstem sources of cardiac vagal tone and respiratory sinus arrhythmia. J Physiol 594,
7249-7265.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Frieman, M., and Baric, R. (2008). Mechanisms of severe acute respiratory syndrome
pathogenesis and innate immunomodulation. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 72, 672-685, Table of
Contents.
Godfraind, C., Langreth, S.G., Cardellichio, C.B., Knobler, R., Coutelier, J.P., Dubois-Dalcq,
M., and Holmes, K.V. (1995). Tissue and cellular distribution of an adhesion molecule in the
carcinoembryonic antigen family that serves as a receptor for mouse hepatitis virus. Lab
Invest 73, 615-627.
Gorbalenya, A.E., Snijder, E.J., and Spaan, W.J. (2004). Severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus phylogeny: toward consensus. J Virol 78, 7863-7866.
Grajales-Reyes, G.E.C., Marco (2020). Interferon responses in viral pneumonias. Science
369, 626-627.
Grasselli, G., Greco, M., Zanella, A., Albano, G., Antonelli, M., Bellani, G., Bonanomi, E.,
Cabrini, L., Carlesso, E., Castelli, G., et al. (2020). Risk Factors Associated With Mortality
Among Patients With COVID-19 in Intensive Care Units in Lombardy, Italy. JAMA Intern
Med.
Gu, H., Chen, Q., Yang, G., He, L., Fan, H., Deng, Y.Q., Wang, Y., Teng, Y., Zhao, Z., Cui,
Y., et al. (2020). Adaptation of SARS-CoV-2 in BALB/c mice for testing vaccine efficacy.
Science.
Gupta, A., Madhavan, M.V., Sehgal, K., Nair, N., Mahajan, S., Sehrawat, T.S., Bikdeli, B.,
Ahluwalia, N., Ausiello, J.C., Wan, E.Y., et al. (2020). Extrapulmonary manifestations of
COVID-19. Nat Med 26, 1017-1032.
Hadjadj, J., Yatim, N., Barnabei, L., Corneau, A., Boussier, J., Smith, N., Pere, H., Charbit,
B., Bondet, V., Chenevier-Gobeaux, C., et al. (2020). Impaired type I interferon activity and
inflammatory responses in severe COVID-19 patients. Science 369, 718-724.
Hamming, I., Timens, W., Bulthuis, M.L., Lely, A.T., Navis, G., and van Goor, H. (2004).
Tissue distribution of ACE2 protein, the functional receptor for SARS coronavirus. A first
step in understanding SARS pathogenesis. J Pathol 203, 631-637.
Hassan, A.O., Case, J.B., Winkler, E.S., Thackray, L.B., Kafai, N.M., Bailey, A.L., McCune,
B.T., Fox, J.M., Chen, R.E., Alsoussi, W.B., et al. (2020). A SARS-CoV-2 Infection Model
in Mice Demonstrates Protection by Neutralizing Antibodies. Cell 182, 744-753 e744.
Hundt, M.A., Deng, Y., Ciarleglio, M.M., Nathanson, M.H., and Lim, J.K. (2020). Abnormal
Liver Tests in COVID-19: A Retrospective Observational Cohort Study of 1827 Patients in a
Major U.S. Hospital Network. Hepatology.
Ing, E.B., Xu, Q.A., Salimi, A., and Torun, N. (2020). Physician deaths from corona virus
(COVID-19) disease. Occup Med (Lond) 70, 370-374.
Israelow, B., Song, E., Mao, T., Lu, P., Meir, A., Liu, F., Alfajaro, M.M., Wei, J., Dong, H.,
Homer, R.J., et al. (2020). Mouse model of SARS-CoV-2 reveals inflammatory role of type I
interferon signaling. J Exp Med 217.
Jiang, R.D., Liu, M.Q., Chen, Y., Shan, C., Zhou, Y.W., Shen, X.R., Li, Q., Zhang, L., Zhu,
Y., Si, H.R., et al. (2020). Pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 in Transgenic Mice Expressing
Human Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2. Cell 182, 50-58 e58.
Kim, Y.I., Kim, S.G., Kim, S.M., Kim, E.H., Park, S.J., Yu, K.M., Chang, J.H., Kim, E.J.,
Lee, S., Casel, M.A.B., et al. (2020). Infection and Rapid Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in
Ferrets. Cell Host Microbe 27, 704-709 e702.
Klein, S.L., Hodgson, A., and Robinson, D.P. (2012). Mechanisms of sex disparities in
influenza pathogenesis. J Leukoc Biol 92, 67-73.
Leibowitz, J., Kaufman, G., and Liu, P. (2011). Coronaviruses: propagation, quantification,
storage, and construction of recombinant mouse hepatitis virus. Curr Protoc Microbiol
Chapter 15, Unit 15E 11.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Leibowitz, J.L., Srinivasa, R., Williamson, S.T., Chua, M.M., Liu, M., Wu, S., Kang, H., Ma,
X.Z., Zhang, J., Shalev, I., et al. (2010). Genetic determinants of mouse hepatitis virus strain
1 pneumovirulence. J Virol 84, 9278-9291.
Li, K., Wohlford-Lenane, C.L., Channappanavar, R., Park, J.E., Earnest, J.T., Bair, T.B.,
Bates, A.M., Brogden, K.A., Flaherty, H.A., Gallagher, T., et al. (2017). Mouse-adapted
MERS coronavirus causes lethal lung disease in human DPP4 knockin mice. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 114, E3119-E3128.
Lucas, C., Wong, P., Klein, J., Castro, T.B.R., Silva, J., Sundaram, M., Ellingson, M.K.,
Mao, T., Oh, J.E., Israelow, B., et al. (2020). Longitudinal analyses reveal immunological
misfiring in severe COVID-19. Nature 584, 463-469.
Mallapaty, S. (2020). The coronavirus is most deadly if you are older and male - new data
reveal the risks. Nature.
McCray, P.B., Jr., Pewe, L., Wohlford-Lenane, C., Hickey, M., Manzel, L., Shi, L., Netland,
J., Jia, H.P., Halabi, C., Sigmund, C.D., et al. (2007). Lethal infection of K18-hACE2 mice
infected with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus. J Virol 81, 813-821.
Miura, T.A., Travanty, E.A., Oko, L., Bielefeldt-Ohmann, H., Weiss, S.R., Beauchemin, N.,
and Holmes, K.V. (2008). The spike glycoprotein of murine coronavirus MHV-JHM
mediates receptor-independent infection and spread in the central nervous systems of
Ceacam1a-/- Mice. J Virol 82, 755-763.
Momtazmanesh, S., Shobeiri, P., Hanaei, S., Mahmoud-Elsayed, H., Dalvi, B., and Malakan
Rad, E. (2020). Cardiovascular disease in COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of 10,898 patients and proposal of a triage risk stratification tool. Egypt Heart J 72, 41.
Montalvan, V., Lee, J., Bueso, T., De Toledo, J., and Rivas, K. (2020). Neurological
manifestations of COVID-19 and other coronavirus infections: A systematic review. Clin
Neurol Neurosurg 194, 105921.
Munster, V.J., Feldmann, F., Williamson, B.N., van Doremalen, N., Perez-Perez, L., Schulz,
J., Meade-White, K., Okumura, A., Callison, J., Brumbaugh, B., et al. (2020). Respiratory
disease in rhesus macaques inoculated with SARS-CoV-2. Nature.
Naqvi, A.A.T., Fatima, K., Mohammad, T., Fatima, U., Singh, I.K., Singh, A., Atif, S.M.,
Hariprasad, G., Hasan, G.M., and Hassan, M.I. (2020). Insights into SARS-CoV-2 genome,
structure, evolution, pathogenesis and therapies: Structural genomics approach. Biochim
Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis 1866, 165878.
Nguyen, L.H., Drew, D.A., Graham, M.S., Joshi, A.D., Guo, C.G., Ma, W., Mehta, R.S.,
Warner, E.T., Sikavi, D.R., Lo, C.H., et al. (2020). Risk of COVID-19 among front-line
health-care workers and the general community: a prospective cohort study. Lancet Public
Health.
Park, A., and Iwasaki, A. (2020). Type I and Type III Interferons - Induction, Signaling,
Evasion, and Application to Combat COVID-19. Cell Host Microbe 27, 870-878.
Perlman, S., Jacobsen, G., and Afifi, A. (1989). Spread of a neurotropic murine coronavirus
into the CNS via the trigeminal and olfactory nerves. Virology 170, 556-560.
Phillips, J.M., and Weiss, S.R. (2011). Pathogenesis of neurotropic murine coronavirus is
multifactorial. Trends Pharmacol Sci 32, 2-7.
Pinol, R.A., Zahler, S.H., Li, C., Saha, A., Tan, B.K., Skop, V., Gavrilova, O., Xiao, C.,
Krashes, M.J., and Reitman, M.L. (2018). Brs3 neurons in the mouse dorsomedial
hypothalamus regulate body temperature, energy expenditure, and heart rate, but not food
intake. Nat Neurosci 21, 1530-1540.
Puelles, V.G., Lutgehetmann, M., Lindenmeyer, M.T., Sperhake, J.P., Wong, M.N., Allweiss,
L., Chilla, S., Heinemann, A., Wanner, N., Liu, S., et al. (2020). Multiorgan and Renal
Tropism of SARS-CoV-2. N Engl J Med 383, 590-592.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Ragab, D., Salah Eldin, H., Taeimah, M., Khattab, R., and Salem, R. (2020). The COVID-19
Cytokine Storm; What We Know So Far. Front Immunol 11, 1446.
Romanov, R.A., Zeisel, A., Bakker, J., Girach, F., Hellysaz, A., Tomer, R., Alpar, A.,
Mulder, J., Clotman, F., Keimpema, E., et al. (2017). Molecular interrogation of
hypothalamic organization reveals distinct dopamine neuronal subtypes. Nat Neurosci 20,
176-188.
Romero-Sanchez, C.M., Diaz-Maroto, I., Fernandez-Diaz, E., Sanchez-Larsen, A., LayosRomero, A., Garcia-Garcia, J., Gonzalez, E., Redondo-Penas, I., Perona-Moratalla, A.B., Del
Valle-Perez, J.A., et al. (2020). Neurologic manifestations in hospitalized patients with
COVID-19: The ALBACOVID registry. Neurology 95, e1060-e1070.
Sun, J., Zhuang, Z., Zheng, J., Li, K., Wong, R.L., Liu, D., Huang, J., He, J., Zhu, A., Zhao,
J., et al. (2020a). Generation of a Broadly Useful Model for COVID-19 Pathogenesis,
Vaccination, and Treatment. Cell 182, 734-743 e735.
Sun, S.H., Chen, Q., Gu, H.J., Yang, G., Wang, Y.X., Huang, X.Y., Liu, S.S., Zhang, N.N.,
Li, X.F., Xiong, R., et al. (2020b). A Mouse Model of SARS-CoV-2 Infection and
Pathogenesis. Cell Host Microbe 28, 124-133 e124.
Takahashi, T., Ellingson, M.K., Wong, P., Israelow, B., Lucas, C., Klein, J., Silva, J., Mao,
T., Oh, J.E., Tokuyama, M., et al. (2020). Sex differences in immune responses that underlie
COVID-19 disease outcomes. Nature.
Walz, L., Cohen, A.J., Rebaza, A.P., Vanchieri, J., Slade, M.D., Dela Cruz, C.S., and
Sharma, L. (2020). Janus Kinase-Inhibitor and Type I Interferon Ability to Produce
Favorable Clinical Outcomes in COVID-19 Patients: A Systematic Review and MetaAnalysis. medRxiv.
Williamson, E.J., Walker, A.J., Bhaskaran, K., Bacon, S., Bates, C., Morton, C.E., Curtis,
H.J., Mehrkar, A., Evans, D., Inglesby, P., et al. (2020). Factors associated with COVID-19related death using OpenSAFELY. Nature 584, 430-436.
Yang, Z., Du, J., Chen, G., Zhao, J., Yang, X., Su, L., Cheng, G., and Tang, H. (2014).
Coronavirus MHV-A59 infects the lung and causes severe pneumonia in C57BL/6 mice.
Virol Sin 29, 393-402.
Zappia, L., and Oshlack, A. (2018). Clustering trees: a visualization for evaluating clusterings
at multiple resolutions. Gigascience 7.
Zhao, Q., Meng, M., Kumar, R., Wu, Y., Huang, J., Deng, Y., Weng, Z., and Yang, L.
(2020). Lymphopenia is associated with severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
infections: A systemic review and meta-analysis. Int J Infect Dis 96, 131-135.
Zheng, K.I., Feng, G., Liu, W.Y., Targher, G., Byrne, C.D., and Zheng, M.H. (2020).
Extrapulmonary complications of COVID-19: A multisystem disease? J Med Virol.
Ziegler, C.G.K., Allon, S.J., Nyquist, S.K., Mbano, I.M., Miao, V.N., Tzouanas, C.N., Cao,
Y., Yousif, A.S., Bals, J., Hauser, B.M., et al. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 Receptor ACE2 Is an
Interferon-Stimulated Gene in Human Airway Epithelial Cells and Is Detected in Specific
Cell Subsets across Tissues. Cell 181, 1016-1035 e1019.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.294231; this version posted September 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder.
B All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A
Percent survival

100

10

0

C

✱✱✱✱

Mock
700 PFU
10,000 PFU
30,000 PFU

O2 Saturation (%)

80
Mock
700 PFU
10,000 PFU
30,000 PFU
2

3

4

5 6
dpi

7

8

9

-20
-30

10,000 PFU

Mock
700 PFU

30,000 PFU

✱✱

8

✱✱✱✱

6
4
2
0

N.D.

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

F
MHV-specific sIgG (OD)

E

1

-10

D

100

40

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

-40

0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
dpi

60

dpi

0

PFU/lung lobe (log10)

50

% wt change

✱✱

1.5

Mock

MHV
1.0
0.5
0.0

2

4

6

8
dpi

10

12

14

G

Mock
MHV(LD0)
MHV(LD50)

MHV
(LD100)

0
I

H

10
0

LD0 survivors
50

LD50 survivors

✱✱

% wt change

Percent survival

100

Mock survivors

3 weeks
days post rechallenge
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

-10

Mock survivors
LD0 survivors

-20

LD50 survivors

-30

0

0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30
days post rechallenge

-40

Fig. 1

LYM

12

6
3
0

(LD50)

E

0.4
0.2

ns

3dpi
Mock

Vi
p

M

Ceacam1

800
600
400

ns

200

3dpi
Mock

Ceacam1

Hypo

FB

FB

FB

MB

MB

3

HB

HB

Lung

Lung

Heart

2 Heart

Liver

Liver

Spleen
Kidney

Spleen
1Kidney

Blood

Blood

600

400

200

0

3dpi

Hypo

3dpi
Mock

6dpi
MHV

✱✱

15
10
ns

5
0

K

ns

20

6dpi
MHV

Hypo
MB

25

✱

V

x1

H

V

J

0

6dpi
MHV

I

0

6dpi
MHV

M

3dpi
Mock

✱✱

50

H

ns

100

IFN-β (pg/ml)

IFN-a (pg/ml)

10

Ifn
b

TNF-a (ng/ml)

0.1

1000
✱✱✱✱

0

0.2

H

15

6dpi
MHV

150

0.3

6dpi
MHV

F

3dpi
Mock

0.4

0.0
3dpi
Mock

20

5

6dpi
MHV
✱

Tn
fa

G

0
3dpi
Mock

IL-6 (ng/ml)

Troponin(ng/ml)

✱✱✱✱

✱✱✱✱

0.0

100

0.5

0.6

200

3dpi
Mock

6dpi
MHV

Tn
fa

D

300

Vi
p

5dpi

✱✱✱✱

400

M

3dpi

PLT
ns

500
103 / µl

80
70

ALT(U/ml)

✱✱✱✱

600

✱✱✱✱

9

90

103 / µl

O2 Saturation (%)

100

C

B

x1

Survivor
Deceased

M

ns

ns

Ifn
b

A

Hypo

10

FB

150

MB

HB

HB

Lung

Lung

Heart

Heart

Liver

5 Liver

Spleen

Spleen

Kidney

Kidney

Blood

Blood

100

50

0

6dpi

Fig. 2

D
100

-10

2

4

6

8

10

12

✱✱✱✱

Ifnar f/f ΔLysM
50

0

14

✱✱✱✱

0

2

4

F

BAL

Ifnar-/-

12

92

3dpi (LD0)

14

Ifnlr-/-

DKO

✱

1.0
0.5

Ifnar-/- Ifnlr-/- DKO

K

Kidney

T
/W
O
K

W
T

K
D

0

Blood

0

O

/-

-/-

L

Tnfa

Ifn
lr-

Ifn
ar

D

K

W
T

O

/Ifn
lr-

-/Ifn
ar

W
T

0

200

D

200

5

Spleen

O
/W
T

400

Liver

ns

400

O
/W
T

✱✱

K

600

10

Heart

ns

600

Ifn
ar

ns

O

0

MHV (log2)
Lung

K

5000

800

✱✱✱

D

✱

800

/-

TNF-a(pg/ml)

ns

10000

J

Ifn
lr-

1000

✱✱

IL-1β (pg/ml))

15000

I
✱✱

Ifn
lr
K

H

G

-/-

WT

Ifn
ar

TCID50/ml (x105)

10

94

ns

1.5

0.0

Il6
Lung

Lung

Heart

Heart

10

10
Liver

Liver

Spleen

Spleen
5

Kidney

5

Kidney

T
/W
O
K
D

O
/W
T
Ifn
lr
K

K

T
/W
O
K
D

O
/W
T
Ifn
lr
K

O
/W
T
K
Ifn
ar

O
/W
T

Blood

Blood

Ifn
ar

IL-6(pg/ml)

WT

✱✱

2.0

8

96

90

dpi (LD0)

dpi (LD0)

E

6

98

O

WT
Ifnar-/Ifnlr-/DKO

-15

0

3

K

-5

2

D

1

ns

100

Ifn
lr/-

✱✱✱✱

0

102

Ifnar f/f

-/-

50

0

✱
ns

Ifn
ar

WT
Ifnar-/Ifnlr-/DKO

Percent survival

5
% wt change

Percent survival

100

0

C

dpi (LD0)

W
T

B

O2 Saturation (%)

A

Fig. 3

A

B

ns

0.4

ns

0.2
0.1

ns

ns

2
1
0

0.0

WT

Ifnar-/-

Ifnlr-/-

✱✱✱✱

800

ns

3

HR (bpm)

Troponin(ng/ml)

0.3

✱✱✱✱

✱

4

ns

ALT(U/ml)

C

700
600
500
400

WT

DKO

Ifnar-/-

Ifnlr-/-

DKO

WT

Ifnar-/-

Ifnlr-/-

DKO

3dpi (LD0)

D

E

MHV(log2)
Hypo

F

Tnfa

3.5
5

Hypo

10

Il6

Hypo
3.0

FB

4

FB
5

FB

MB

MB

MB

2.0

HB

1.5

2

0

HB

2.5

3

HB

0

✱✱✱

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314
dpi (LD100)

50

0

0

1

2

3
4
5
dpi (LD100)

6

7

T
/W
O
K
D

Ifn
lr
K

K
Ifn
ar

Vehicle
IFN-β

BAL

1.5

15
✱✱

5

Vehicle

Lung

Liver

0.03

✱✱

✱

10

0

K

IFN-β

MHV/18s

50

100

J

MHV/18s

Vehicle
IFN-β

Percent survival

100

I

TCID50/ml (x105)

H

O
/W
T

O
/W
T

T
/W
O
K
D

Ifn
lr
K

K
Ifn
ar

G
Percent survival

O
/W
T

O
/W
T

T
/W
O
K
D

O
/W
T
Ifn
lr
K

Ifn
ar

K

O
/W
T

1

1.0
0.5
0.0

Vehicle

IFN-β

0.02
0.01
0.00

Vehicle

IFN-β

Fig. 4

A

B
SARS-CoV-2

MHV-A59
Lung
Lymphopenia
Throbocytopenia
CNS
Skin
Kidney
Liver
CVD
Neutrophila
GI
Eye
0

COVID-19
50

100 (%)

Fig. 5

A

B
ORF1ab

SARS-CoV2

3a

Spike

E

M

6 7a 7b 8

3b

MHV-A59

2a HE

ORF1ab

4

Spike

N

10

9b 14

M

5a

N

Ceacam1/18s

ca
ea
C

ce

2

E

0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.03

A

D

Hypo
FB
MB

3

HB

0.02

Lung
Heart

0.01

2

Liver
Spleen

0.00

od

o

1

Blood

B

lo

yp

B

H

H

M
B

FB

K

Li
ve
r
id
ne
y
Lu
ng
H
ea
rt
Sp
le
en

Kidney

3dpi/Mock

3
2
1
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01

od
B

lo

o
yp
H

B
H

B
M

FB

Li
ve
r
id
ne
y
Lu
ng
H
ea
rt
Sp
le
en

0.00

K

Ace2/18s

C

m

1

E

Fig S1

preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
dpi

35

600

30

mock
700 PFU
10,000 PFU
30,000 PFU

25
20

1

2

3

4

5 6
dpi

7

8

9

400

mock

200

700 PFU
10,000 PFU
30,000 PFU

0

E

250

1

2

3

4

5 6
dpi

7

8

200
150
100
50
0

9

10,000 PFU
30,000 PFU

mock
700 PFU
1

2

3

4

5 6
dpi

7

8

800

Pulse distension (um)

1

D

800
Breath rate (brpm)

mock
700 PFU
10,000 PFU
30,000 PFU

2

C

40
HR (bpm)

3

T(oC)

4

mock

10,000 PFU

700 PFU

30,000 PFU

600
400
200
0

9

1

2

3

4

5 6
dpi

G

7

8

9

Percent survival

100

50

Male
✱

Female

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

dpi (LD100)

MHV-specific sIgM (OD)

H
1.5

Mock

MHV
1.0
0.5
0.0

2

4

6

8
dpi

10

12

14

6

8
dpi

10

12

14

MHV-specific sIgA (OD)

I
1.0

Mock

0.8

MHV

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

2

4

J
MHV-specific sIg (OD)

2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5

mock survivors

2

LD0 survivors

IAV

LD50 survivors

1

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

3 weeks

0

9

0

2

3

4

5

-10
-20

Mock surviors
MHV survivors

7

8

MHV survivors

2
1
0

-30

Mock surviors

Q

R

WBC

15

✱✱✱✱

1

2

3 4 5 6
days post IAV

✱✱

GRAN
3

0.6

0

✱✱✱

7

T

-30

1

2

3

0.2

2

Gran

3

4 5
dpi

6

Mono

7

Ig
E

Ig
G
3

8

9

LYM

75

2
1

50
25

0.1

IAV+MHV

0

0.3

1

100

ns

% WBC

5

IAV+Mock

0.4

103 / µl

103 /

103 / µl

µl

-20

10

IAV+Mock
IAV+MHV
0

8

0.5

-10

-40

S

MONO
✱✱✱✱

✱✱✱✱

50

0

days post rechallenge

P

Ig
G
2c

100

3
6

Ig
G
1
Ig
G
2a
Ig
G
2b

O

days post IAV
1

Ig
M

0.0

Ig
A

Mock
MHV

3

0

N
10

14dpi

Mock
MHV

2.5

Percent survival

M

Food take
(g/d/mouse)

L
4

% wt change

Food take(g/d/mouse)

K

% wt change

F

B

5

0
4

5

6

7

dpi

8

3dpi
Mock

6dpi
MHV

0.0

0
3dpi
Mock

6dpi
MHV

3dpi
Mock

6dpi
MHV

0

Mock MHV Mock MHV
6dpi
3dpi

U
0.15

Spleen wt (g)

Food take(g/d/mouse)

A

✱✱✱✱

0.10
0.05
0.00

Mock

6dpi

Mock 6dpi

Fig S2

0.4

G

Liver

ns

ns

0.20

****
Ifnβ/18s

300
200

10
5

100

0

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

0.00

0

****

0.10

**

0.05

0.1
0.00

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

K
✱

Mx1/18s

0.3
0.2

0.4
0.2

0.1
0.0

0.6

0.0

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

L
0.5
✱

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

0.010

0.000

1.0
ns

Il6/18s

Li
ve
r
Sp
le
en
K
id
ne
y
B
lo
od

H
B
Lu
ng
B
A
LF
H
ea
rt

M
B

H

yp

o

Li
ve
r
Sp
le
en
K
id
ne
y
B
lo
od

M
B

FB

H

FB

Tnfa/18s

Kidney

Spleen

Liver

Heart

Lung

HB

MB

Blood

yp

H
B
Lu
ng
B
A
LF
H
ea
rt

✱✱

20
10

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

Brain
✱✱✱✱

Mock

3dpi

40

0.00

0

6dpi
ns

Hypo

FB

MB

HB

0.2

0.0

ns

✱✱✱✱

ns

0.1

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

0.00005

ns

0.015

0.005

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

Heart

0

60

20
Mock 3dpi 6dpi

0.00

ns

80

0.02

0.20

0.3

0.5

ns

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

0.15

✱

0.10
0.05
0.00

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

N
Kidney

ns

✱✱✱✱

0.00003

✱✱✱✱

0.00002

✱✱✱✱

0.00001

N.D.

0.00000

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

Mock
3dpi
6dpi

✱✱✱✱

0.00004

0.020
MHV/18s

0.4

0.025

✱

FB

0.4

1.5

0.0

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

M
Spleen

MHV/18s

ns

0.06
0.04

J

***

0.02

FB

✱✱

2.0

Il29/18s

Ifnβ/18s

0.4

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

FB

✱✱✱✱

0.8

Heart

0.1

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

FB
1.0

ns

0.0

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

****

0.4

0

ns

0.03

30

ns

0.6

0.2

ns

0.01

H

Liver

20

0.08

****

0.2

0.0

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

40

0.000

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

0.8

60

0.010

ns

1.0

*

0.04

0.005

0.05

80

ns

0.5
0.0

FB

0.5

1.0

Viperin/18s

0.0

100

Heart

1.5

ns

0.10

0.00

✱✱✱✱

0.015

0.15

ns

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

0.3

Pkr/18s

0.2

Heart
*
****

2.0

Viperin/18s

Mx1/18s

Ifnβ/18s

ns

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

Heart

0.15

**

0.4
0.3

o

2

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

Heart

0.5

4

0.05

Pkr/18s

I

6

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

✱

ns

0.05

****

Liver

8

0.10

o

0

***

0

Liver
***

10

0.15

2

✱✱✱✱

Lung

0.020

0.20

4

ns

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

Lung

Lung
0.25

****

ns

0.0

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

Liver
15

400
MHV/18s

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

1.0
0.5

0.0

Ifnar/18s

500

Mock 3dpi 6dpi

N.D.

0.2

5
Lung

6

1.5

Mx1/18s

0.0

0

****

H
B
Lu
ng
B
A
LF
H
ea
rt

0

ns

M
B

0.2

0.4

Mx1/18s

0.6

100

Liver
**

Ifnβ/18s

200

F

✱✱

2.0

****

0.8

300

MHV/18s

MHV/18s

✱

0.6

-5

Lung

Lung

ns

-10

Ifnar/18s

1.0

-15

Il28/18s

✱

E

ns

0.10

0.00

MHV/18s

BAL

Lung

400

5dpi

3dpi
6dpi

0.15

0.05

ns

0.00

(LD50)

FB

D

3dpi

5dpi
(LD50)

✱✱✱✱

Mock

✱✱✱✱

0.20

6dpi

✱✱✱

0.05

Pkr/18s

3dpi

(LD50)

0.25

3dpi

ns

0.10

Pkr/18s

5dpi

0

Viperin/18s

3dpi

100

Viperin/18s

0

LD0
LD50

Mock

✱✱✱✱

0.15

MHV/18s

100

200

yp

0

300

Ifnar/18s

200

200

400

ns
✱

0.20

500

Ifnar/18s

400

C

Log2(MHV)-3dpi

FB

600

300

B

ns

Hypo

Breath rate (brpm)

HR (bpm)

800

Pulse distension (um)

400

1000

Deceased

ns

ns

ns

ns

Survivor

Deceased

Survivor

Deceased

ns

N.D.
Li
ve
r
Sp
le
en
K
id
ne
y
B
lo
od

Survivor

H

A

Fig S3

C

50
ns

0.4

50

6

0

15 30 45 60 75 90 105 120

✱

DKO

50
0

IgA

IgG
3 dpi

FB

MB

MHV/18s

0.04

N

2

ns

ns

WT

Ifnar-/- Ifnlr-/-

Il6/18s

ns

0.0002
0.0001

0.006

ns

0.004

0.000

Ifnar-/- Ifnlr-/-

S

WT

Ifnar-/- Ifnlr-/-

DKO

✱

1.0

0.00004

DKO

lung Ifnar-/- Ifnlr-/-

DKO

✱

WT

Ifnar-/- Ifnlr-/-

✱✱✱

Ifnar-/- Ifnlr-/-

DKO

ns

FB

MB

0.00004

✱✱✱

Ifnar-/Ifnlr-/-

ns

DKO

0.00002

Hypo

FB

ns

0.00010

ns

0.00005

DKO

0.00000

HB

ns

ns

0.00008

0.00015

MB

Heart

R

0.00020

✱✱✱

DKO

ns

HB

Liver

Ifnar-/- Ifnlr-/-

WT

0.00006

0.00000
Hypo

WT

✱

ns

liver Ifnar-/- Ifnlr-/-

0.10

Ifnlr-/-

Q

Liver
✱✱✱✱

ns

M

Ifnar-/-

0.00004

DKO

ns

0.15

0.00

DKO

WT

0.00006

0.00000
WT

✱✱✱

0.05

0.00002

0.00002
0.00000

Heart

0.20

0.00008✱✱✱✱

ns

1.5

0.00006

ns

10

L

0.002

WT

20

ns

15

0

DKO

✱

P

ns

0.008

0.0003

Ifnar-/- Ifnlr-/-

Blood

0.0

DKO

Lung

0.010

ns

WT

0.5

O

Lung

0.0004

40

H

✱✱✱✱

5

2.0

ns

3

0

DKO

✱

K

✱✱✱✱

1
Ifnar-/- Ifnlr-/-

20

ns

40

HB

4

ns

60

0

Hypo

Spleen

ns

WT

60

0

DKO

Liver

✱

20

J

0.02

Tnfa/18s

✱✱

5

0.06

0.0000

ns

✱✱✱✱

0.08
MHV/18s

0

IgM

Kidney

0.10

Ifnar-/- Ifnlr-/-

G

Lung
80

1

I

0.00

3
2

F

Ifnlr-/DKO

4

ns

Ifnlr-/-

WT
Ifnar-/-

5 ✱✱✱✱

MHV/18s

100

E
MHV/18s

MHV-specific sIg
(relative to Mock)

150

WT

MHV/18s

ns

Ifnar-/-

DKO

Il6/18s

D
WT

Ifnar-/- Ifnlr-/-

80

hpi (100 dilution of LD0)

dpi (LD0)

200

WT

Tnfa/18s

5

0.000

MHV/18s

4

0.0

Tnfa/18s

3

0.005

*

***

100

0.010

Il6/18s

2

**

DKO

***

0.015

0.1

MHV/18s

1

0.020

0.2

Ifnar-/-

0
0

***

0.3

Tnfa/18s

0

0.5

BAL

*

PLT X 10 6

Ifnar-/- Female

100

BAL

*

WBC X 10 6

Ifnar-/- Male

Percent survival

Percent survival

100

BAL

RBC X 10 6

B

A

0.00006
0.00004

✱

0.00002
liver Ifnar-/- Ifnlr-/- DKO

0.00000

heart Ifnar-/- Ifnlr-/-

DKO

Heart
✱

0.0008
ns

Il6/18s

0.0006
0.0004

ns

0.0002
0.0000

heart Ifnar-/- Ifnlr-/- DKO

Fig S4

D

DKO

O2 Saturation (%)

750

98
97

0

Ifnlr-/-

DKO

1

2
dpi (LD0)

700
650
600

WT

550
3

500

Ifnar-/-

Ifnlr-/0

DKO

1

2

DKO

200
150
100

3

0

1

dpi (LD0)

2

550
450
350

150

3

Ifnar-/DKO

WT
Ifnlr-/-

250

0

1

2

3

dpi (LD0)

K

Percent survival

100

Vehicle
IFN-λ

50

0

ns

Ctrl serum
Convalescent

50

0

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314
dpi (LD100)

L

ns

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314
dpi (LD100)

M

Lung
400

0

% wt change

Ifnar-/-

WT Ifnar-/-Ifnlr-/- DKO
Gran
Mono
LYM

650

dpi (LD0)

DKO

WT

110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

H
Ifnar-/-

WT
Ifnlr-/-

250

J

I

Heart

C

ns

2

0

100

Ifnlr-/-

3

% WBC

103 / µl

103 / µl

103 / µl

800

96

✱

0.5

G

99

Ifnar-/-

1.0

1

100

WT

4

0.0

0

F

95

Ifnar-/-

200

0

E

Liver

WT

2

✱✱✱✱

✱✱

ns

400

ns

5

Pulse distension (um)

Ifnar-/- Ifnlr-/-

ns

GRAN

W
T
Ifn
ar
-/Ifn
lr/D
K
O

WT

✱

4

1.5

Breath rate (brpm)

Ifnar-/- Ifnlr-/- DKO

0

600

W
T
Ifn
ar
-/Ifn
lr/D
K
O

WT

0.000

✱✱✱✱

✱✱

ns

0.001

MONO

✱✱

6

10
5

PLT

✱

HR (bpm)

0.05

✱✱

✱✱

0.002

LYM

8

103 / µl

0.10

15

103 / µl

Ngal/18s

Bnp/18s

0.15

ns

ns

0.003

0.20

B

✱✱✱✱

W
T
Ifn
ar
-/Ifn
lr/D
K
O

0.25

0.00

WBC

0.004

W
T
Ifn
ar
-/Ifn
lr/D
K
O

ns

✱✱

Percent survival

Kidney

ns

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

300

dpi (LD0)

-10
-20

-40

200
100

PBS
-30

ns

8

MHV/18s

Heart

W
T
Ifn
ar
-/Ifn
lr/D
K
O

A

Ctrl serum
0

Convalscent

Ctrl

Convalescent

Serum iv on 1dpi

*

50 µm

DKO

0.5

300
200
100

Ifnar-/-

100

Ctrl

Convalescent

Contrl serum

Convalescent
0

15 30 45 60 75 90 105 120
hpi (LD0)

IF
N

ty
p

Serum iv on 1dpi

***

50

0

0

e
AR
IF 1-/N
IF
L
N
AR R1/1/
LR
1/-

O

✱✱

400

1.0

W
ild

50 µm

Liver
500

1.5

0.0

50 µm

N
MHV/18s

Ifnlr-/-

positive cells/mm2

2.0

Percent survival

50 µm

Fig S5

