bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Integrated analyses of single-cell atlases reveal age, gender, and smoking status associations
with cell type-specific expression of mediators of SARS-CoV-2 viral entry and highlights
inflammatory programs in putative target cells
Christoph Muus*, Malte D. Luecken*, Gokcen Eraslan*, Avinash Waghray*, Graham
Heimberg*, Lisa Sikkema*, Yoshihiko Kobayashi*, Eeshit Dhaval Vaishnav*, Ayshwarya
Subramanian*, Christopher Smilie*, Karthik Jagadeesh*, Elizabeth Thu Duong*, Evgenij
Fiskin*, Elena Torlai Triglia*, Meshal Ansari*, Peiwen Cai*, Brian Lin*, Justin Buchanan*,
Sijia Chen*, Jian Shu*, Adam L Haber*, Hattie Chung*, Daniel T Montoro*, Taylor Adams,
Hananeh Aliee, Samuel J., Allon Zaneta Andrusivova, Ilias Angelidis, Orr Ashenberg, Kevin
Bassler, Christophe Bécavin, Inbal Benhar, Joseph Bergenstråhle, Ludvig Bergenstråhle, Liam
Bolt, Emelie Braun, Linh T Bui, Mark Chaffin, Evgeny Chichelnitskiy, Joshua Chiou, Thomas
M Conlon, Michael S Cuoco, Marie Deprez, David S Fischer, Astrid Gillich, Joshua Gould,
Minzhe Guo, Austin J Gutierrez, Arun C Habermann, Tyler Harvey, Peng He, Xiaomeng Hou,
Lijuan Hu, Alok Jaiswal, Peiyong Jiang, Theodoros Kapellos, Christin S Kuo, Ludvig Larsson,
Michael A. Leney-Greene, Kyungtae Lim, Monika Litviňuková, Ji Lu, Leif S Ludwig, Wendy
Luo, Henrike Maatz, Elo Madissoon, Lira Mamanova, Kasidet Manakongtreecheep , CharlesHugo Marquette, Ian Mbano, Alexi Marie McAdams, Ross J Metzger, Ahmad N Nabhan, Sarah
K. Nyquist, Lolita Penland, Olivier B Poirion, Sergio Poli, CanCan Qi, Rachel Queen, Daniel
Reichart, Ivan Rosas, Jonas Schupp, Rahul Sinha, Rene V Sit, Kamil Slowikowski , Michal
Slyper, Neal Smith , Alex Sountoulidis, Maximilian Strunz, Dawei Sun, Carlos Talavera-López,
Peng Tan, Jessica Tantivit, Kyle J Travaglini, Nathan R. Tucker, Katherine Vernon, Marc H.
Wadsworth, Julia Waldman, Xiuting Wang, Wenjun Yan, William Zhao, Carly G. K. Ziegler,
The NHLBI LungMAP Consortium, and The Human Cell Atlas Lung Biological Network^
* These authors contributed equally
^ Corresponding author: lung@humancellatlas.org, hca@humancellatlas.org
Note: Full author affiliations and contacts are at the end of the manuscript.

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

ABSTRACT
The COVID-19 pandemic, caused by the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, creates an urgent need
for identifying molecular mechanisms that mediate viral entry, propagation, and tissue pathology.
Cell membrane bound angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) and associated proteases,
transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) and Cathepsin L (CTSL), were previously identified
as mediators of SARS-CoV2 cellular entry. Here, we assess the cell type-specific RNA expression
of ACE2, TMPRSS2, and CTSL through an integrated analysis of 107 single-cell and single-nucleus
RNA-Seq studies, including 22 lung and airways datasets (16 unpublished), and 85 datasets from
other diverse organs. Joint expression of ACE2 and the accessory proteases identifies specific
subsets of respiratory epithelial cells as putative targets of viral infection in the nasal passages,
airways, and alveoli. Cells that co-express ACE2 and proteases are also identified in cells from
other organs, some of which have been associated with COVID-19 transmission or pathology,
including gut enterocytes, corneal epithelial cells, cardiomyocytes, heart pericytes, olfactory
sustentacular cells, and renal epithelial cells. Performing the first meta-analyses of scRNA-seq
studies, we analyzed 1,176,683 cells from 282 nasal, airway, and lung parenchyma samples from
164 donors spanning fetal, childhood, adult, and elderly age groups, associate increased levels of
ACE2, TMPRSS2, and CTSL in specific cell types with increasing age, male gender, and smoking,
all of which are epidemiologically linked to COVID-19 susceptibility and outcomes. Notably,
there was a particularly low expression of ACE2 in the few young pediatric samples in the analysis.
Further analysis reveals a gene expression program shared by ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells in nasal,
lung and gut tissues, including genes that may mediate viral entry, subtend key immune functions,
and mediate epithelial-macrophage cross-talk. Amongst these are IL6, its receptor and co-receptor,
IL1R, TNF response pathways, and complement genes. Cell type specificity in the lung and
airways and smoking effects were conserved in mice. Our analyses suggest that differences in the
cell type-specific expression of mediators of SARS-CoV-2 viral entry may be responsible for
aspects of COVID-19 epidemiology and clinical course, and point to putative molecular pathways
involved in disease susceptibility and pathogenesis.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

INTRODUCTION
COVID-19 is a global health threat due to its rapid spread, morbidity, and mortality. Despite
progress in viral identification, sequencing of the full viral genome, creation of initial diagnostics,
and the development of therapeutic hypotheses, many outstanding hurdles remain. These include
deciphering the basis of the increased risk associated with certain demographic groups and
identifying molecular mechanisms of disease pathogenesis.
The clinical presentation and transmission of COVID-19 is complex. Common symptoms include
fever, cough, shortness of breath, chest pain, malaise, fatigue, headache, myalgias, anosmia, and
diarrhea, while laboratory and radiographic findings include lymphopenia and ground-glass
opacities on chest imaging, respectively1–8. Of an initial cohort of 1,099 hospitalized patients
diagnosed with COVID-19, many developed diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) 1, pneumonia
(79.1%), not infrequently complicated by acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS, 3.4%), and
shock (1.0%), with 5.0% of patients requiring ICU admission and 2.2% requiring ventilation4. As
the number of patients has surged, multi-system pathologies have been increasingly described,
including kidney injury9, liver injury, gastrointestinal symptoms4, cardiac injury and
dysfunction2,5,10, and multiorgan failure1–4. In addition to nasal and throat secretions, SARS-CoV2 RNA has also been detected in saliva and stool specimens10,11, suggesting possible alternative
routes of transmission beyond respiratory droplets12,13. SARS-CoV-2 may also infect the testis,
similarly to SARS-CoV14,15. Vertical transmission from mother to fetus remains a possibility. At
least five neonates born to pregnant women with COVID-19 pneumonia were reported to test
positive for SARS-CoV-2 infection after birth16–18 and other studies report newborns with elevated
virus-specific antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 born to mothers with COVID-1916,19. However, several
other studies have thus far failed to find evidence for intrauterine transmission from pregnant
women with COVID-19 to their newborns in cohorts as large as 38 patients20–22. Additionally,
newborns from 9 COVID-19 patients who had cesarean deliveries in their third trimester tested
negative for SARS-CoV-217.
There is substantial variation in the clinical consequences of infection across individuals, ranging
from asymptomatic carrier status to death. It has been suggested that undocumented subclinical
infection contributes to the rapid dissemination of the virus23. As of April 14, 2020, COVID-19
has caused 1,970,225 confirmed infections and 124,544 deaths worldwide
(https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html). While true case fatality rate (CFR) is difficult to assess
early in an epidemic24–26, estimates from modeling studies range from 0.9% - 3.3%27,28. Disease
severity and mortality rates show a striking rise with age29, with CFR estimates ranging from
<0.1% for patients under 30 years old to >10% for those over 7024, with a slightly higher incidence
and mortality in men4,30. Children are significantly less likely than adults to develop severe disease,
and reported pediatric deaths are rare31. Smoking is most likely associated with more severe
disease4,32. Finally, adults with pre-existing cardiovascular disease and acute myocardial injury
have higher rates of disease acuity and death33,34.
The coronavirus non-segmented, positive sense RNA genome of ~30 kb contains coding regions
for the expression of structural proteins including spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M), and
nucleocapsid (N) proteins. Virion recognition of host cells is initiated by interactions between the
S protein and its receptor35. ACE236–38, an essential regulator of the renin-angiotensin system39, is

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

the receptor for both SARS-CoV40 and SARS-CoV-2. The receptor-binding domain of the SARSCoV-2 S-protein has a higher binding affinity for human ACE2 than SARS-CoV36,41, whereas the
interaction with CD147 (encoded by the gene BSG), another reported receptor for the SARS-CoV2 S-protein, is weak (CD147: Kd, 0.185 µM vs hACE2: Kd, ~15 nM)42. Following receptor
binding, the virus gains access to the host cell cytosol through acid-dependent proteolytic cleavage
of the S protein. For SARS-CoV, a number of proteases including TMPRSS2 and CTSL cleave at
the S1 and S2 boundary and S2 domain (S2’)43 to mediate membrane fusion and virus infectivity.
For SARS-CoV-2, both pharmacological inhibition of endogenous TMPRSS2 protein and
TMPRSS2 overexpression support a role for TMPRSS2-mediated cellular entry37,44.
The identification of the specific cell types that can be infected by SARS-CoV-2 will inform our
understanding of disease transmission and pathogenesis, which are often cell context-specific.
Studies suggest that key infection routes involve the nasal passages, airways, and alveoli, where
epithelial cells play a key barrier role. Identifying putative target cells in other organs could inform
our understanding of extra-pulmonary COVID-19 associated organ failure or of potential placental
transmission. Early analyses of the Human Lung Cell Atlas revealed that some of the cells of the
nasal passages, airways, alveoli, and gut co-express ACE2 and TMPRSS245,46.
Here, we perform integrated analysis of 107 single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-Seq studies,
including 22 studies of the lung and airways, and 85 additional studies of other diverse tissues,
spanning both published and unpublished datasets. We comprehensively define the expression
patterns of the ACE2 viral receptor and accessory proteases genes. We test how their expression is
related to age (from prenatal to old age), sex, and smoking status. We identify gene expression
programs associated with cells that can be infected by the virus and compare these programs across
specific cell types, organs, and species. To further inform future studies, we assess the conservation
of these human features in mouse models and explore the expression of other proteases that may
play a role in the viral replication cycle.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

RESULTS
A cross-tissue survey identifies dual-positive ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells in nasal, airway,
alveolar, and intestinal epithelia, as well as in other organs associated with COVID-19
pathology or transmission
Previous analyses of Human Cell Atlas datasets established that ACE2, the viral receptor, and one
of its entry-associated proteases, TMPRSS2, are expressed in nasal, lung, and gut epithelial cells45.
Specifically, nasal goblet cells and multiciliated cells comprised the highest fraction of dualpositive ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells45, consistent with a plausible role for a nasal viral reservoir that
supports transmissivity. In the distal lung, co-expression occurred in AT2 cells45,47,48. Previous
surveys across other tissues also showed a relatively high portion of ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells within
colonic enterocytes, another potential viral reservoir that promotes viral transmission49.
To perform a comprehensive survey, we enumerated the proportion of dual-positive
ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells and ACE2+CTSL+ cells50 across 92 human studies (including seven of the
lung and airways) with single-cell or single-nucleus RNA-seq (sc/snRNA-seq) (Fig. 1, Methods,
Supplementary Table 1 and 2). These included a large survey of published datasets from diverse
tissues, which we assigned to five broad cell categories, (Fig. 1a,b, Extended Data Fig. 1,2,
Supplementary Table 1). We further analyzed more finely annotated published and unpublished
datasets (Methods, Fig. 1c,d, Supplementary Table 3). Consistent with previous reports45, dualpositive ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells in the proximal airways were largely secretory goblet and
multiciliated cells, and dual-positive cells in the distal lung were largely AT2 cells (Fig. 1c,
Extended Data Fig. 3a).
ACE2 expression in secretory (especially goblet) and AT2 cells is also supported by scATAC-seq
from the primary carina and subpleural parenchyma, respectively (Fig. 2, n=3 samples per
location, n=1 patient), showing accessibility at the ACE2 locus in a portion of AT2 cells (10.8%,
364 out of 3,371 cells, Methods), as well as secretory and multiciliated cells, and to a lesser extent
some basal and tuft cells (Fig. 2a-c). The proportion of AT2 cells with an open ACE2 locus is
somewhat higher than of ACE2+ AT2 cells by scRNA-seq in the same patient and region (pleura:
10.8%, 364 out of 3,371 cells vs. 6.2%, 199 out of 3,215 cells). Cells with accessible chromatin at
both the ACE2 and TMPRSS2 loci were also most commonly found in epithelial cells, especially
AT2 cells (Fig. 2d, 4.98%, 168 of 3,371 AT2 cells from a subpleural sample; comparable to 3.9%,
124 of 3,215 in matched scRNA-Seq), secretory cells (6.72%, 8 of 119 secretory cells from small
airway of the subpleural region, and 6%, 12 of 200 secretory cells from primary carina of the large
airway), and multiciliated cells (6.61%, 32 of 484 multiciliated cells from subpleural sample, and
4.81%, 31 out of 644 multiciliated cells from primary carina).
There were dual-positive ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells in tissues beyond the respiratory system (Fig.
1a-c), including enterocytes, pancreatic ductal cells, prostate luminal epithelial cells,
cholangiocytes51, oligodendrocytes in the brain, inhibitory enteric neurons, heart
fibroblasts/pericytes52, and fibroblasts and pericytes in multiple other tissues (Fig. 1c).
ACE2+TMPRSS2+ epithelial cells were most prevalent (in order) within the ileum, liver, lung, nasal
mucosa, bladder, testis, prostate, and kidney (Fig. 1a). Enterocytes had a substantial proportion of
dual-positive cells (Fig. 1c), and are possibly part of a renin-angiotensin multicellular circuit53. In

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

line with the kidney’s role in the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, dual-positive cells are
enriched in the proximal tubular cells and in principal cells of the collecting duct (Fig. 1a,c).
Interestingly, brain oligodendrocytes, multiciliated and sustentacular cells in olfactory epithelium,
AT1 cells in non-smoker lung, and ductal cells in pancreas – all ACE2+TMPRSS2+ – were also all
enriched for MYRF, a transcription factor necessary for myelination in the brain and sufficient to
induce expression of the myelin proteins MOG (myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein) and MBP
(myelin basic protein)54. ACE2+CTSL+ cells were enriched in additional subsets, associated with
COVID-19 pathology, most notably the olfactory epithelium, ventricular cardiomyocytes, heart
macrophages, and pericytes in multiple tissues, including the heart, lung, and kidney (Fig. 1d).
The presence of dual-positive cells in the lung, heart, and kidney may reflect that cells in these
organs may be direct targets of viral infection and pathology5,55. Dual-positive cells in the
sustentacular and basal cells of the olfactory epithelium (Fig. 1c) may be associated with a loss of
the sense of smell56. Dual-positive cells in the corneal and conjunctival epithelium, may contribute
to viral transmission4,57. Dual positive cardiomyocytes may be related to “direct” cardiomyocyte
damage (see Tucker et al. companion manuscript58), whereas heart pericytes may indicate a
vascular component to the cardiac dysfunction, and could contribute to increased troponin leak in
patients without coronary artery disease. Notably, ACE2-expressing heart pericytes in another
dataset (Tucker et al) is even higher (30%) than any other tissue dataset analyzed here (max. 21.7%
in kidney, Extended Data Fig. 4). Despite the lymphopenia observed with COVID-192,4,59,60, we
did not typically observe ACE2 mRNA expression in scRNA-seq profiles in the bone marrow or
cord blood (Fig. 1a,b), although there was ACE2 expression in some tissue macrophages,
including alveolar and heart macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 4). Further studies of ACE2 RNA
and protein expression in COVID-19 disease tissue will help elucidate its expression in immune
cells61.
Validation of ACE2, TMPRSS2 and CTSL mRNA and protein expression in airway and
alveolar epithelium
To validate our findings from scRNA-seq analysis and to determine the spatial expression patterns
of ACE2, TMPRSS2, and CTSL, and their corresponding proteins we performed fluorescence in
situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry on tissue sections of airway and alveoli from healthy
donor lungs that were rejected for lung transplantation.
First, we performed triple fluorescence in situ hybridization to identify ACE2, CTSL and TMPRSS2
on alveolar sections. We observed co-expression, albeit at low levels, of all three genes in alveolar
cells (Fig. 1e). We then performed co-staining with cell type-specific markers. We observed ACE2
transcripts in a subset of type 2 (AT2) cells identified by canonical AT2 protein markers, HTII280 and pro-SFTPC (Fig. 1f,g). Similarly, we observed TMPRSS2 gene expression in HTII-280+
AT2 cells (Fig. 1f). Immunostaining for TMPRSS2 protein further confirmed AT2 cell expression
(Extended Data Fig. 5a). We also observed TMPRSS2 protein expression at low levels in some
AT1 cells identified by the canonical AT1 protein marker AGER (Extended Data Fig. 5a). Of
note, some non-epithelial cells also expressed these three genes. We further validated the
expression of ACE2 by bulk mRNA-seq in sorted AT2 cells, including those from long-term
cultured alveolar organoids (Extended Data Fig. 5b). We then performed immunohistochemistry
and deployed three different available putative ACE2 antibodies to establish ACE2 protein
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

expression (Supplementary Table 4). One of these 3 antibodies, the one used previously to
functionally block cellular viral entry, specifically labeled adult pro-SFTPC-positive AT2 cells
(Extended Data Fig. 5c). As a cautionary note, the lack of agreement between antibody staining
patterns suggests that some of these antibodies may be non-specific.
Previous studies have revealed that ACE2 is highly enriched in mucous cells of the nasal and lower
respiratory tract epithelium . In healthy lungs, both large and small airways contain mucous cells
in surface airway epithelium, albeit at low numbers. However, submucosal glands (SMGs) that
reside deep within the airway tissues are composed of abundant mucous cells. To test whether
these mucous cells also express ACE2, TMPRSS2, and CTSL, we performed an integrated analysis
on scRNA-seq datasets obtained from microdissected SMGs of the healthy donors. We observed
overlapping expression and relatively high enrichment of AEC2, TMPRSS2 and CTSL in mucous
cells of the SMGS (Extended Data Fig. 5e). In situ transcript analysis for ACE2 further confirmed
the presence of transcripts in acinar epithelial cells of the SMGs (Fig. 1h), and cells expressing
ACE2 in the large airway epithelium (Fig. 1i).
ACE2 and TMPRSS2 expression in airway epithelial and AT2 cells increases with age and is
higher in men, and airway epithelial cell expression increases with smoking
We next sought to understand how the expression of each of these three key genes -- ACE2,
TMPRSS2, and CTSL -- in specific cell subsets may relate to three key covariates that have been
associated with disease severity: age (older individuals are more severely affected), sex (males are
more severely affected), and smoking (smokers are more severely affected)62. We integrated
samples across many studies, as no single dataset generated to date is sufficiently large to address
this question. We assembled 22 datasets (Supplementary Table 2, Supplementary Data File
D3), comprised of 1,176,683 cells from 164 individuals, spanning 282 healthy nasal, lung, and
airway samples profiled by scRNA-seq or snRNA-seq from either biopsies, resections, entire lungs
that could not be used for transplant, or post mortem examinations, allowing us to study a diversity
of respiratory regions and cell types (Fig. 3a). These included 6 published datasets63–68 and 16
datasets that are not yet published69–73. In the case of unpublished data, we only obtained singlecell expression counts for the three genes, as well as the total UMI counts per cell, cell identity
annotations, and the relevant anonymous clinical variables (age and sex, as well as smoking status
when ascertained). Cell identity annotations were manually harmonized using an ontology with
three levels of annotation specificity (Fig. 3b, Supplementary Table 2); focusing on levels 2 and
3 allowed us to include a large number of datasets, while retaining relatively high cell subset
specificity (Fig. 3a,b). To facilitate rapid data sharing, we analyzed data pre-processed by each
data-generating team at the level of gene counts, using total counts as a size factor. We used
Poisson regression (diffxpy package; Methods) to model the association between the expression
counts of the three genes and age, sex, and smoking status, and their possible pair-wise interactions
(Fig. 3c), using total counts as an offset, and dataset as a technical covariate to capture sampling
and processing differences. It should be noted that modeling interaction terms was crucial as their
omission resulted in reversed effects for age and sex for particular cell types (Discussion). This
model was fitted to non-fetal lung data (761,693 cells, 165 samples, 77 donors, 10 datasets) within
each cell type to assess cell-type specific association of these covariates with the three genes. To
further validate sex and age associations, we fit a simplified version of the model without smoking
status covariates to the full non-fetal lung data (986,342 cells, 225 samples, 125 donors, 16
datasets).
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Uncertainty is challenging to model in our single-cell meta-analysis as variability exists on the
levels of both donors and cells. For simplicity, we modeled the overall variance with both
contributions covered implicitly by treating each cell as an independent observation. As cells from
the same donor cannot be typically regarded as independent observations, this can result in inflated
p-values, especially when there are few donors for a particular cell type. To counteract this
limitation, we employed three approaches: (1) We used a simple noise model (Poisson) to reduce
the chance of overfitting donor variability to obtain spurious associations; (2) We confirmed
significant associations from the single-cell model in a pseudo-bulk analysis to ensure effect
directions are consistent when modeling only donor variation (Methods, Fig. 3d, Extended Data
Fig. 6, 7, 8, Supplementary Data D1); and, (3) We investigated whether significant associations
change direction when holding out any one dataset to ensure that the effect is not dominated by
the inclusion of many cells from only one source (Methods, Fig. 3f, Supplementary Data D1).
We regarded an association that passes all of these validations as a robust trend, while associations
that appear dominated by a single dataset (often because this dataset is a major contributor of a
given cell type) were denoted as indications.
We focused on trends or indications in those cell types where both TMPRSS2 and ACE2 are
predominantly expressed in the lung: airway epithelial cells (basal, multiciliated, and secretory
cells), alveolar AT2 cells, and submucosal gland secretory cells (Fig. 3e). Strikingly, we find
robust trends of ACE2 expression with age, sex, and smoking status in these cell types (Fig. 3d,
Extended Data Fig. 6 and MALTE4): ACE2 expression increases with age in basal and
multiciliated cells. ACE2 expression is elevated in males in airway secretory cells and alveolar
AT2 cells. Furthermore, we find strongly elevated levels of ACE2 in past or current smokers in
multiciliated cells (log fold change (log FC): 1.52, Fig. 3d). Significant associations of ACE2
expression indicate increased expression with age in AT2 (largest age effect: slope of log
expression per year of 0.020) and secretory cells, and increased expression of ACE2 in males in
multiciliated cells. Further indications associate past or current smoking with decreased ACE2
expression in AT2 cells, and increased ACE2 expression in basal cells. However, these last five
indications are not robust trends and depend on the inclusion of a single dataset (Fig. 3f), often
because that dataset contributes a large number of cells of a particular type. Specifically, when we
held out the largest declined donor transplant dataset (Supplementary Table 2, “RegevRajagopal”, most cells and most samples), a declined donor tracheal epithelium dataset (“Seibold”,
Supplementary Table 2, most donors in the smoking analysis), or a further declined donor lung
dataset (“Kropski-Banovich”, Supplementary Table 2) respectively, the effect is no longer
present (Methods, Fig. 3f, Supplemenatry Data D1).
The above trends and indications for sex and age were further validated in the simplified model on
the full non-fetal lung dataset (Extended Data Fig. 8, Supplementary Data D2). With the
exception of the age association in basal and secretory cells, all associations were found to be
significant at a false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 5%, confirmed by pseudo-bulk analysis,
and were supported at least at the level of indication. Indeed, all robust trends were also supported
as robust trends in the simplified model. Fitting the simplified model on the smoking data subset
shows that modeling smoking status is crucial to detect the basal and secretory age association.
Without modeling the effect of smoking status on basal and secretory cell ACE2 expression, this
variance is captured as uncertainty against which the age effect is evaluated as not significant.

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Taking into account smoking status is of particular importance as the effect sizes associated with
smoking tend to be much larger than age effects, and tend to be larger than sex effects. For
example, in multiciliated cells the effect sizes assigned to smoking status, sex, and age associations
with ACE2 expression are β=1.52, β=0.51, and β=0.0107 respectively, where β represents the log
FC and the slope of log expression per year.
Examining joint trends of ACE2 and the protease genes within the same cell type, there are
indications of up-regulation of both ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in multiciliated cells (ACE2 indication
dependent on “Seibold” dataset) in males and with age (both indications dependent on “RegevRajagopal” dataset). In AT2 cells, there is an indication of joint up-regulation of ACE2 and
TMPRSS2 with age (dependent on “Regev-Rajagopal” dataset), and an indication of ACE2 and
CTSL down-regulation in smokers (dependent on “Kropski-Banovich” dataset). All above joint
trends for age and sex covariates were confirmed on the full non-fetal lung data using the simple
model without smoking covariates.
In aggregate, elevated levels of cell-type specific ACE2 and associated proteases are correlated to
increasing age, in smokers, and in males.
Distinctive changes in ACE2+TMPRSS2+ expression patterns during human development
and very low expression in infants and young children
The age associations highlighted particularly low expression in samples from very young children
(newborn to 3 years old). As reports suggest that most infants and young children cases do not
display severe disease11,74, we inspected the subsets of studies of human development and pediatric
samples from our integrated analysis (Supplementary Table 2). These included cells from 12 first
trimester samples (8 donors) of fetal lung (8.5 weeks post conception; wpc), 29 fetal lung samples
(26 donors) from the second trimester (13-24 weeks)68, 13 lung samples (10 donors) spanning from
third trimester premature births (n=4), full term newborns (n=1), ~3-month old (n=4), 3-year-old
(n=3), and 10-year-old (n=1) children. Because the number of samples here is small, all
observations must be interpreted with caution.
The extent of ACE2 expression in lung cells changes during development (Fig. 3g,
Supplementary Table 5). There are dual-positive cells present in the very early first trimester
lungs by scRNA-seq, and some ACE2 expression in epithelial cells in the second trimester samples
(Extended Data Fig. 3a,b). Notably, spatial transcriptomics of 8.5 pcw fetal lung did not capture
any ACE2 expression (data not shown). In lungs from third trimester pre-term births, ACE2
expression is high, with ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells observed in alveolar AT2 cell populations
(Extended Data Fig. 3b).
Strikingly, ACE2 expression is very low in normal lungs of newborns, the one ~3 months’ lung
sample, and the 3-year-old lungs (Fig. 3g). This is further supported by single-cell chromatin
accessibility by transposome hypersensitive sites sequencing (scTHS-Seq75) from human pediatric
samples (full gestation, no known lung disease) collected at day 1 of life, 14 months, 3 years, and
9 years (n=1 at each time point) (Extended Data Fig. 9a). ACE2 gene activity scores (Methods),
when present, were in the AT1/AT2 population, but no signal was present at birth, it was low in
the 9-year-old and 3-year-old sample, and higher in the 14 month-old (Extended Data Fig. 9b-d).

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Notably, immunohistochemistry (IHC) of the ~3 month-old infant lung also showed fewer ACE2immunoreactive AT2 cells (Extended Data Fig. 5d).
We also assessed whether ACE2, TMPRSS2, and CTSL are expressed in the human placenta during
pregnancy, using data from three published scRNA-seq studies: two from the first trimester
(64,000 cells and 14,000 cells) and one from full-term placenta (20,518 cells)76–78. ACE2 was
expressed (1.4%) in maternal decidual/stromal cells, maternal pericytes, and fetal extravillous
trophoblasts, cytotrophoblasts, and syncytiotrophoblast in both first-trimester and term placenta
(Fig. 1d). Note that there was little expression of TMPRSS2 (0.2%) in the placenta and accordingly
few ACE2+TMPRSS2+ dual-positive cells (as we previously reported45). However, CTSL is
expressed in most cells (56%) in the maternal-fetal interface, and there are ACE2+CTSL+ dualpositive cells (1.3%) among maternal decidual/stromal cells, pericytes, and fetal trophoblasts
(HLA-A, B negative) in both first-trimester and term placentae.
Overall, these patterns may be important in understanding why children are more resistant to
COVID-19 and and in considering risk during pregnancy.
An immune gene program associated with ACE2+TMPRSS2+ expression in airway, lung and
gut cells
Our Human Lung Cell Atlas analyses have revealed immune signaling genes that co-vary with
ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in airway and lung cells45,46. These analyses identified antiviral response
genes that are enriched in ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells (e.g., IDO1, IRAK3, NOS2, TNFSF10, OAS1,
MX1), and suggested that ACE2 itself is interferon regulated45,46.
To explore such gene programs in a broader context, we identified signatures for dual-positive
ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells compared to dual-negative ACE2-TMPRSS2- cells in the nasal epithelium,
lung, and gut (Supplementary Tables 6, 7 8) with two complementary approaches. The first
aimed to find features that characterize programs of dual positive cells that are shared by different
cell types in one tissue (“tissue programs”). The second aimed to find features that are associated
with dual positive cells compared to other cells of the same type, and may or may not be shared
with other types (“cell programs”) (Methods). To infer tissue programs, we trained a random
forest classifier to discriminate between dual-positive and dual-negative cells (excluding ACE2
and TMPRSS2; 75:25 class balanced test-train split), generalizing across multiple cell types in one
tissue, and ranked genes according to their importance scores in the classifier (Methods). To infer
cell programs, we performed differential expression analysis between dual-positive and dualnegative cells within each cell subset. We note that ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells have more unique
transcripts detected (Extended Data Fig. 10b): this can reflect a technical confounder, biological
features, or both. We conservatively controlled for these differences (by sampling dual positive
and dual negative cells from matched gene complexity bins; Methods; Extended Data Fig. 10b,
Extended Data Fig. 11). Importantly, these methods do not assume that ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells
form a distinct subset within each cell type. Rather, our goal is to leverage the variation among
single cells within a single type to identify gene programs that are co-regulated with ACE2 and
TMPRSS2 within each expressing cell subset.
Tissue programs (Fig. 4a, Extended Data Fig. 10a, Supplementary Table 7, 8) were enriched in

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

several pathways related to viral infection and immune response (see Fig. 4b, Extended Data Fig.
10a for visualization of selected genes, and Supplementary Tables 6 for the full list). These
include phagosome structure, antigen processing and presentation, and apoptosis. Among the
tissue program genes we highlight: CEACAM5 (lung, nasal, gut programs) and CEACAM679
(lung), surface attachment factors for coronavirus spike protein; SLPI (lung, nasal), a secreted
protease inhibitor that is associated with virus resistance80; PIGR (lung, gut), the polymeric
immunoglobulin receptor that may promote antibody-dependent enhancement via IgA81; and,
CXCL17 (lung, nasal), a mucosal chemokine that attracts dendritic cells and monocytes to the
lungs82. In addition, the tissue programs yielded multiple genes that are associated with cholesterol
and lipid metabolic pathways and endocytosis (DHCR24, LCN2, FASN); high expression of both
MHC I (B2M, HLA-B) and MHC II (HLA-DRA, DRB1, CTSS, CD74) pathways, expanding on
prior evidence that AT2 cells can serve as antigen presenting cells in infection83; genes indicating
preparation against cellular injury through ROS inhibition, preventing proteases, or through
antiviral responses (interferons, extracellular RNAse, etc: PLAC8, TXNIP); complement genes
(C3, C4BPA); genes involved in immune modulation (BTG1); and, tight junction genes (DST,
CLDN3, CLDN4).
The cell programs (Fig. 4c, Extended Data Fig. 11a,b, Supplementary Table 6) were enriched
in many of the same genes and pathways as tissue-specific programs (Fig. 4d, Supplementary
Table 6,7,8,9,10), and highlight a potential role for TNF signaling in ACE2 regulation. We first
confirmed that the cell programs were not merely associated with the number of transcripts per
cell (Extended Data Fig. 11c). While some genes were shared between the tissue and cell
programs (e.g., many virus-related genes, such as CEACAM5, CXCL17, SLPI, and HLA-DRA), the
cell programs further captured unique biological functions and activities. For example, dual
positive lung secretory cells differentially expressed genes involved in TNF signaling including
RIPK3, a key regulator of inflammatory cell death via necroptosis, previously implicated in SARSCoV pathogenesis84. Both lung dual positive secretory and multiciliated cells differentially
expressed lysosomal genes (MFSD8, CTSS, CTNS, CTSH), potentially relevant for endolysosomal entry of coronaviruses85. Dual positive AT1 cell programs included genes involved in
immunoproteasome (PSMB8, PSMB9, Fig. 4c), class I and II antigen presentation (HLA-DMA,
HLA-DRB5, HLA-DPB1, HLA-DRA, HLA-DPA1), and phagocytosis. Dual-positive nasal goblet
cells differentially expressed several cytokines and chemokines, including granulocyte-colony
stimulating factor (CSF3), which may impact hematopoiesis, the recruitment of neutrophils, and
inflammatory pathology; CXCL1 and CXCL3, chemoattractants for neutrophils; interleukin-19
(IL19), which induces the production of IL-6 and TNF86; and CCL20, which is upregulated by
TNF 87. The AT2 cell program included the surfactant proteins, SFTPA1 and SFTPA2; the IL-1
receptor (IL1R1), which may promote antiviral immune responses (below); and, multiple
components of MHC-II (e.g., HLA-DPA1, HLA-DPB1), congruent with a role in antigen
presentation.
Cell programs from multiple tissues (Fig. 4c,d) included genes related to TNF signaling (e.g.,
BIRC3, CCL20, CXCL1, CXCL2, JUN, NFKB1), raising the possibility that anti-TNF therapy may
impact the expression of ACE2 and/or TMPRSS2. Consistent with this hypothesis, ACE2
expression in enterocytes was significantly lower in ulcerative colitis patients treated with antiTNF compared to untreated patients (mean = 0.22 and 0.13 log2(transcripts per 10,000 (TP10K)+1)
in treated vs. untreated; adjusted P < 1e-3). However, we could not control for many important

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

features, including disease severity, which is strongly associated with anti-TNF treatment, raising
the need for future work. Some of the genes are targets of known drugs88. For example, dualpositive lung secretory cells expressed, in addition to ACE2 (targeted by ACE inhibitors), other
drug targets, including C3, HDAC9, IL23A, PIK3CA, RAMP1, and SLC7A11. Other program
genes were shown to interact with SARS-CoV-2 proteins via affinity purification mass
spectrometry 89. Among those was GDF15, which was identified as a putative interaction partner
for the SARS-CoV-2 protein Orf889, is a central regulator of inflammation90, and was a member
of the dual-positive cell programs of both lung basal cells and nasal multiciliated cells.
Some program genes may be particularly related to COVID19 pathological features and may
indicate putative therapeutic targets. For example, MUC1 is especially highly induced in dualpositive cells (in tissue and specific cell programs), which may be associated with respiratory
secretions91. Importantly, the lung tissue and gut enterocyte programs include the gene encoding
the IL6 co-receptor (IL6ST), and the AT2 cell program includes IL6. IL6 signaling has been
implicated in uncontrolled immune responses in the lungs of COVID19 patients, elevated serum
IL6 levels are associated with the need for mechanical ventilation92, and anti-IL6R antibodies
(tocilizumab) are being tested for clinical efficacy in COVID-19 patients. Indeed, IL6ST and IL6
are higher in dual positive vs. dual negative AT2 cells (Extended Data Fig. 11d), although IL6
expression is relatively low in these cells from healthy tissue. Additional cell types, such as heart
pericytes, are enriched for cells with co-expression of ACE2 with IL6R or IL6ST (Extended Data
Fig. 12).
The immune-like features of ACE2+ epithelial cells are also reflected in the regulatory features of
the ACE2 locus by scATAC-Seq (Fig. 4f). Epithelial cells (AT1, AT2, secretory, multiciliated,
ionocytes, and neuroendocrine cells) with open chromatin at the ACE2 locus show high motif
activity scores93 for interferon-regulatory factors such as IRF1/7 (MA0050.1, adj p-val=0.02,
MA0772.1, adj p-val=0.08), STAT1::STAT2 (MA0517.1, adj p-val=0.15), FOXA1 (MA0148.2, adj
p-val=0.24) and FOXD2 (MA0847.2, adj p-val=0.27), compared to epithelial cells with no sign of
open chromatin at the ACE2 locus, though the difference is statistically significant (adj p-val
<0.05) only for IRF1. Interestingly, Forkhead Box Transcription Factors have been implicated in
regulation of ACE2 transcription94. Note that because epithelial cells with an accessible ACE2
locus tend to have a higher number of fragments in peaks than cells with inaccessible ACE2
(Extended Data Fig. 11f), consistent also with higher UMIs in scRNA-seq, some of the cells with
inaccessible ACE2 could be false negatives, reducing our power.
Previous studies in the healthy lung predicted that interactions between AT2 cells and myeloidlineage macrophages may be important for immune regulation and surfactant homeostasis95. To
explore this possibility, we predicted interactions between AT2 cells (in general, or
ACE2+TMPRSS2+ dual-positives) and myeloid cells (Methods96), using our large declined donor
transplant dataset (“Regev/Rajagopal”; 41 samples, 10 patients, 2-6 locations each). AT2 cells and
myeloid cells were present in lung lobes samples from all 10 patients, whereas samples from 5
patients contained both ACE2+TMPRSS2+ dual-positive AT2 cells and myeloid cells. We
identified significant predicted interactions involving Oncostatin M (OSM), an IL6-type cytokine
expressed by myeloid cells97, with the Oncostatin M Receptor (OSMR) and its paralog receptor
LIF Receptor Subunit Alpha (LIFR) expressed in both for AT2 cells in general, and in double
positive ones). Interactions involving the complement pathway were also predicted (for all AT2

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

and dual positives) between Complement C3 and C5 expressed by AT2 cells and their cognate
receptor expressed in myeloid cells. Three samples had interactions between the IL1 receptor on
AT2 cells and IL1B or IL1RN in myeloid cells. The IL1-receptor interactions were identified
mostly (in 2 out of 3 samples) involving only dual-positive AT2 cells, suggesting a possible role
of ACE2+TMPRSS2+ dual-positive cells in IL1-mediated processes. Finally, we identified
interactions between CSF1, 2, or 3 expressed in AT2 cells (including double positives) and their
receptors expressed in myeloid cells. These predicted interactions further support the previously
identified roles for cross-talk between AT2 and myeloid cells, such as macrophages, in immune
regulation (OSM, complement, IL1) and surfactant homeostasis (CSF), as previously
highlighted95.
Conserved expression patterns in mouse models
We next asked whether human cell types of interest were present in animal models. While such
analyses cannot address molecular compatibility (due to sequence variation in ACE2 across
species, as shown for lower compatibility of SARS-CoV and mouse ACE298), they can help
determine if dual-positive cells are present in commonly employed models, and if their
characteristics, proportions, and programs are similar to those of their human counterparts. In a
separate study46, our lung network showed strong similarities to the human data in a macaque
model. Here, we focused on the more distant, but commonly used, mouse model.
Ace2+Tmprss2+ and Ace2+Ctsl+ dual-positive cells were present primarily in club and multiciliated
cells in the airway epithelia of healthy mice99 (Ace2+Tmprss2+ club 5.1% [4.7%, 5.4%] and
multiciliated 2.8% [2.3%, 3.5%], Ace2+Ctsl+ club 11.1% [10.6%, 11.6%] and multiciliated 3.5%
[2.9%, 4.3%]), consistent with the expression patterns found in human airways (Fig. 5a).
Furthermore, Ace2 expression increased over a 2-month time-course of healthy mouse aging in
both club (p=1.16e-06) and goblet (p=0.01911) cells (Fig. 5a). The proportion of Ace2+Tmprss2+
dual-positive cells did not significantly increase with age during this time course (data not shown),
but the proportion of Ace2+Ctsl+ dual-positive cells significantly increased in club cells during this
time-course (Fig. 5b). Interestingly, the mice were aged between 2-4 months, a 2-month period
that is reported to reflect the maturation period from early to mature adults100. Examining bulk
RNA-Seq profiles of sorted populations of alveolar AT2 cells (SFTPC+), airway basal cells
(KRT5+), alveolar endothelial cells (CD45-CD31+), alveolar epithelial cells (Epcam+), whole lung
and whole trachea from a KRT5-CreER/LSL-TdTomato/SFTPC-eGFP transgenic mouse model,
and across tissues from ENCODE, showed that Ace2, Tmprss2 and Ctsl are expressed in sorted
AT2 cells, whole trachea and whole lung, as well as in stomach, intestine, kidney and bladder.
In human smokers, statistical modeling uncovered a robust trend of increased ACE2 expression in
airway epithelial cells, while expression in AT2 cells was reduced (Fig. 3d, Extended Data Fig.
6). To experimentally confirm these findings, we examined cell profiles from mice exposed daily
to cigarette smoke for two months, followed by scRNA-seq of whole lungs (Fig. 5c). Epithelial
specific expression patterns of mouse Ace2 and the Ace2+Tmprss2+ and Ace2+Ctsl+ dual-positive
cells were largely consistent with the human data (Fig. 5d). Upon smoke exposure, there was a
significant increase in Ace2+ airway secretory cell numbers, while the fraction of Ace2+ AT2 cells
was unaltered (Fig. 5e). Moreover, the expression levels of Ace2 were significantly increased in
airway secretory cells (Fig. 5f), but not in AT2 cells (Fig. 5g). This was in agreement with bulk

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

RNA-seq of mouse lungs exposed to different doses of cigarette smoke101, in which Ace2 levels
increased in a dose-dependent manner by daily cigarette smoke over 5 months (Fig. 5h). Notably,
the COVID-19 relevant proteases Tmprss2 and Ctsl were also significantly increased by smoke
exposure in mice (Fig. 5i,j). Thus, mouse smoking data shows similar trends as observed in
humans and experimentally confirms the association of ACE2 levels with smoking.
We also compared the patterns between the mouse and human placenta, analyzing Ace2, Tmprss2,
and Ctsl expression across 100,000 cells from scRNA-seq data during mouse placenta
development from embryonic days 9.5 to 18 (Shu et al., unpublished). We find Ace2+Tmprss2+
dual-positive cells (1.4%) in a large fraction of fetal trophoblasts with strong epithelial signatures.
Ace2+Tmprss2+ dual-positive cells express signatures of AT2 cells and hepatocytes, and many also
express Ctsl. Ace2+Ctsl+ dual-positive cells (3.4%) are also present among fibroblasts, stromal
cells, and fetal trophoblasts in both mice and humans (Fig. 5k, Extended Data Fig. 13). Notably,
while ACE2+CTSL+ dual-positive fibroblasts and stromal cells in humans are of maternal origin,
Ace2+Ctsl+ dual-positive fibroblasts and stromal cells are of fetal origin in mice.
Expression patterns of additional proteases that may be relevant to infection
TMPRSS2 has been demonstrated to mediate SARS-CoV-2 infection in vitro37,44, but SARS-CoV2 also infects cells in the absence of TMPRSS237. Thus, additional proteases likely play roles in
proteolytic cleavage events of spike and other viral proteins that underlie entry (fusion) and egress.
To systematically predict proteases potentially involved in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis, we tested
for co-expression of each of 625 annotated human protease genes102 with ACE2 in the large
declined donor transplant dataset (“Regev/Rajagopal”) from 10 patients. The analysis recovered
TMPRSS2 as one of the significantly co-expressed in multiple lung epithelial cell types (Fig. 6a,
Supplementary Table 11, 12). In addition, multiple members of the proprotein convertase
subtilisin kexin (PCSK) family were also significantly co-expressed with ACE2 in both proximal
and distal airway epithelial cells (Fig. 6a,b), including FURIN, PCSK2, PCSK5, PCSK6 and
PCSK7 in AT2 cells. Proprotein convertases have known roles in coronavirus S-protein
priming43,103,104. We obtained similar results in an independent dataset of 182,952 cells from 40
donors (Extended Data Fig. 14a,b, “aggregated lung”).
To further investigate the role of proprotein convertases as candidates for SARS-CoV-2 S-protein
processing we analyzed the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein sequence. Multiple sequence alignment of
S-protein sequences of SARS-CoV-2 and other beta-coronaviruses revealed a polybasic insert at
the S1/S2 junction present only in SARS-CoV-2 spike (Extended Data Fig. 14c). While polybasic
sites are found in multiple members of betacoronavirus lineages A and C (e.g., MERS-CoV),
SARS-CoV-2 is the only known member of lineage B harboring a polybasic motif in the S1/S2
region (Extended Data Fig. 14c). As previously reported, this polybasic sequence corresponds
well to cleavage motifs of multiple PCSK family proteases (Extended Data Fig. 14d)105–107, and
has a high probability for its PCSK-mediated cleavage (at amino acid 685) (by ProP and
PROSPERous108,109) as well as additional sites including the S2’ position (at amino acid 815),
which would release predicted fusion-mediating peptides (Extended Data Fig. 14e)110.
We next examined PCSKs expression and co-expression with ACE2 across lung cell subsets (Fig.
6c, Extended Data Fig. 14f). FURIN, PCSK5 and PCSK7 were broadly expressed across multiple

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

lung cell types, and PCSK1 and PCSK2 were largely restricted to neuroendocrine cells, as
previously reported107, with PCSK2 further detected in 11.2% of AT2 cells (Fig. 6d, Extended
Data Fig. 14g). In many cell subsets we observed dual expression with ACE2 at fractions
comparable to or higher than those of ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells (Fig. 6e, Extended Data Fig. 14h).
These include AT2 cells (ACE2+TMPRSS2+, ACE2+FURIN+ and ACE2+PCSK2+ at 0.90%, 0.78%,
and 0.56%, Fig. 6e); multiciliated cells in the proximal airway (ACE2+TMPRSS2+,
ACE2+FURIN+, ACE2+PCSK7+, and ACE2+PCSK5+ at 0.91%, 0.37%, 1.02%, and 0.91%), and
basal cells (ACE2+TMPRSS2+, ACE2+FURIN+, and ACE2+PCSK7+ at 0.19%, 0.21%, and 0.74%).
Co-expression is present across tissues in addition to the lung (Extended Data Fig. 14i,j),
including the liver, ileum, kidney and nasal airways, with the highest percentages of ACE2+PCSK+
dual positive cells in nasal airways (ACE2+PCSK7+ 1.36%, ACE2+FURIN+ 0.67%), bladder
(ACE2+PCSK5+ 0.45%) and testis (ACE2+PCSK7+ 0.41%).
Because different host proteases may contribute to different stages of the viral life cycle107,111, we
also examined the prevalence of ACE2+TMPRSS2+PCSK+ triple-positive cells (TPs) in the lung
dataset. ACE2+TMPRSS2+PCSK7+ were the main triple positive cells in multiciliated (0.75%) and
secretory cells (0.72%) of proximal airways, and ACE2+TMPRSS2+FURIN+ TPs were the most
common within AT2 cells (0.36%) (Extended Data Fig. 14k). Finally, when we examined all
known human proteases for co-expression with ACE2 in major lung epithelial cell types (Fig. 6f),
we recovered cathepsins (CTSB, CTSC, CTSD, CTSL, CTSS), proteasome subunits (e.g. PSMB2,
PSMB4, PSMB5), and complement proteases (C1R, C2, CFI) (Fig. 6f, Extended Data Fig. 15),
the latter also captured in our programs above (Fig. 4).
DISCUSSION
We performed integrative analyses of single-cell atlases in the lung and airways and across tissues
to identify cell types and tissues that have the key molecular machinery required for SARS-CoV2 infection. We then examined the relationship between specific cell types and three key covariates
-- age, sex, and smoking status -- that have been related to disease severity. We further used the
scale of these integrated atlases to identify gene programs in major epithelial cell subsets that may
be infected by the virus, and search for other potential accessory proteases. Our hope is that this
extensive analysis and resource will help with hypothesis generation (and refutation) towards
better understanding of the molecular and cellular basis of COVID-19 infection, and the
identification of putative therapeutic avenues.
Our cross-tissue analysis substantially expands on our 45,46,58,112 and others’ 113–115 earlier efforts,
allowing us to identify cell subsets across diverse tissues that may be implicated in virus
transmission, pathogenesis, or both. Focusing on pathogenesis, in addition to key subsets in the
lung, airways and gut, we identified ACE2+ cells that co-express either TMPRSS2 or CTSL in
diverse organs, many of which have been associated with severe disease. These include epithelial
cells in the liver, kidney, pancreas, and olfactory epithelium, cardiomyocytes, pericytes and
fibroblasts in the heart, and oligodendrocytes in the brain. For example, the presence of double
positive cardiomyocytes and cardiac pericytes and fibroblasts may provide a pathological basis for
the cardiac abnormalities noted in COVID-19 patients including elevated troponin, a signature of
cardiomyocyte injury, myocarditis, and sudden cardiac death5. As the co-expression of genes

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

involved in SARS-CoV2 infection are highest in cardiac pericytes in healthy heart, damage to
vascular beds may trigger troponin release in otherwise normal hearts. Moreover, as myocardial
ACE expression is increased in patients with existing cardiovascular diseases (Tucker et al.
companion manuscript58), SARS-CoV2 infection may result in greater damage to cardiomyocytes,
and account for greater disease acuity and poorer survival in these patients.
One intriguing clinical observation is that some COVID-19 patients display an array of neurologic
symptoms116,117,118, reported as seizures and acute necrotizing encephalopathy, similar to that
previously observed following other infections such as influenza119,120. Neuroinflammation could
result from direct viral infection of the brain, or a systemic cytokine storm121–123,124–126,121–123.
Direct viral invasion of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV is observed in multiple brain regions in
human patients and mouse models124,125, consistent with widespread ACE2 expression in numerous
brain cell types. Furthermore, SARS-CoV has been shown to infiltrate the brain via the olfactory
epithelium–olfactory bulb axis127; olfactory transmission for SARS-CoV-2 has been recently
proposed128. Other possible transmission routes could be through the infection of
ACE2+TMPRSS2+ enteric neurons synapsing with vagal afferents, or entry through blood-CNS
interfaces such as the choroid plexus or meninges121,129–131. Profiling immune cells at these sites
after infection is an important future step to better understand how the viral response may lead to
encephalitis. One intriguing possibility is that encephalitis might arise as an autoimmune response
to myelin antigens expressed by infected cells. Antibodies against peptides of myelin proteins have
been clinically shown to be associated with autoimmune encephalitis and seizures132–134, and
myelin peptides are targets of T cells135 in demyelinating inflammatory neurological diseases such
as acute demyelinating encephalomyelitis, Guillain-Barre Syndrome, and multiple sclerosis135–142.
Oligodendrocytes, the myelin-producing cells of the CNS, are the main ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cell
type in the brain, the myelin transcriptional regulator MYRF was enriched in certain
ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cell types as noted above, and myelin proteins MOG and MBP were coexpressed in numerous ACE2+ clusters across organs. MYRF and MBP were significantly
differentially expressed in ACE2+TMPRSS2+ subsets of the lung and gut (Supplementary Table
10); myelin targeting Th17 cells trained in the gut are able to infiltrate the CNS in a mouse model
of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis143. Taken together, the expression of myelin
proteins across multiple ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells may hypothetically contribute to antigen
presentation and autoimmune response in the context of viral infection. A small number of
COVID-19 patients were reported to have Guillain-Barre Syndrome144, with a demyelinating
process in some; this is consistent with observations of Guillain-Barre Syndrome following other
viral infections such as Zika, influenza, and Epstein-Barr virus139,145,146. Whether anti myelin
specific immunity can be induced by virus infected cells expressing myelin proteins remains an
area for future study.
Our meta--analysis of scRNA-seq across studies provided the required statistical power to uncover
population-level signals at a molecular level and at single-cell resolution. We found that the SARSCoV-2 receptor and associated proteases were up-regulated in airway epithelial and AT2 cells with
age and in males, an association that may shed light on the marked increase in mortality with age.
Furthermore, ACE2 was up-regulated in airway epithelial cells (basal and multiciliated cells) in
past or present smokers, but down-regulated in their AT2 cells; we have also confirmed this in an
experimental system in a mouse model. These contrasting smoking associations show the
importance of the single-cell resolution, as the down-regulation in AT2 cells will be masked by

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

the airway epithelial signal, leading to loss of association or misinterpretation of seemingly
consistent ACE2 signals in bulk RNA-Seq147. Importantly, ACE2 is particularly lowly expressed
in young pediatric samples, also mirrored by lack of chromatin accessibility in the ACE2 locus.
ACE2 expression is known to be regulated in complex ways across different tissues and may be
affected by both common therapies (ACEi/ARB) (Tucker et al., companion manuscript58), and
during infection46. Moreover, both higher ACE2 expression per cell and a higher fraction of ACE2+
cells can in principle have implications for infection, but may have conflicting effects on
pathogenesis, as ACE2 knockout mice show more severe ARDS upon lung injury because of its
role in the renin-angiotensin pathway, which seems to protect from consequences of lung injury
and inflammation148 (for potential roles of this pathway on CoV infection (pre-COVID) see the
review in 149). As SARS-CoV2 binding will lead to internalization and therefore downregulation
of ACE2 on the cell surface, the protective function of ACE2 via its proteolytic processing of
Angiotensin-II may be lost. Thus, the smoking mediated downregulation of ACE2 in AT2 cells
may not protect cells from being infected but rather may increase ARDS due to more severe loss
of ACE2 from the cell surface upon infection. Other confounders, including ACEi which are not
available to our meta-analysis may further impact our results.
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first single-cell meta-analysis (in any setting). To
perform this meta-analysis, we used a model that included both the tested covariates (age, sex, and
smoking status), technical covariates (dataset and the number of UMIs per cell), and several
interaction terms. Including these interaction terms was crucial, as omission resulted in increased
background variation and reversed effect estimates. Likewise, modeling the smoking status of a
donor was important to reduce background variation and account for the unbalanced distribution
of covariates in the dataset. For example, while we have similar numbers of male ascertained
smokers and non-smokers (21 and 20 donors), there are three times as many female ascertained
non-smokers as female smokers (27 and 9 donors), which is reflective of this bias in the
population150. The addition of these terms increases the complexity of the model. Indeed, only one
dataset (“Seibold”) had sufficient numbers of donors of various ages, sex, and smoking status to
fit the full model. Thus, performing the meta-analysis was only possible due to the aggregation of
a large number of healthy single-cell datasets enabled by the HCA Lung Biological Network and
a community-wide effort.
A limitation of our expression model is that each cell is treated as an independent observation.
Thus, the significance of association with traits such as sex, age, and smoking status may show
inflated p-values, especially where the associations are determined from few donors. In this case,
the variation between cells from a single donor dominates the variation between donors,
background variation is underestimated and effect significance can be overestimated. Aggregating
many datasets allows us to counteract this effect, yet p-value inflation may occur in cell types that
are not as commonly shared across datasets. Our main conclusions are drawn on airway epithelial
and AT2 cells, which are distributed widely across datasets and are modeled on the basis of many
donors. Furthermore, we have confirmed significant associations by pseudo-bulk analysis and by
holding out datasets. This confirmation ensures that associations are consistent when only
considering donor variation, and we are aware if these associations are dataset dependent (often
when one dataset is a particularly major source of a given cell type). Models that account for both
single-cell count distributions, and population structure in the data have the potential to improve
future meta-analyses across single-cell atlases.

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Having a cell type annotation with consistent resolution across datasets was instrumental for
analyzing the association with clinical covariates up to the resolution of basal, secretory, or
multiciliated cells. These cell type labels still aggregate over considerable diversity, which is the
subject of ongoing scientific research. Importantly, the labeled subtypes of these cell clusters differ
between datasets. Thus, in those cases where individual associations depend on a particular dataset
not being held out, it may be the case that these associations become more robust at a higher level
of cell type annotation. Future high-resolution cell annotation efforts have the potential to further
consolidate our single-cell meta-analysis results.
In addition to modeling associations between gene expression and clinical co-variates, we also
examined whether the proportion of ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells per sample is associated with age or
sex. While we can observe a trend of double positive cell proportions increasing with age
(Extended Data Fig. 3a), the high compositional diversity across samples and studies (Fig. 3a,
Extended Data Fig. 16), the potential confounders (total counts, dataset), and limited sample
numbers are prohibitive to modeling these associations. Further metadata that describe the sample
diversity such as harmonized annotations on anatomical location, sampling methods, and sample
processing can help to capture this heterogeneity in ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cell proportion models.
The expression of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in lung, nasal and gut epithelial cells is associated with
expression programs with many shared features, involving key immunological genes and genes
related to viral infection, raising many hypotheses for future studies, especially as more patient
tissue samples are analyzed in the coming months. In the lung, epithelial cells express IL6, IL6R
and IL6ST, which raises the hypothesis that infection may trigger cytokine expression from these
cells and contribute to uncontrolled immunological responses. The immune-like programs in these
cells are further reinforced by the accessibility of STAT and IRF binding sites in scATAC-Seq
data, consistent with another study from our network showing the role of interferon in regulating
ACE2 expression in epithelial cells46. Notably, scRNA-Seq analysis of immune cells from
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of COVID-19 patients identified high activity of transcription factors
such as STAT1/2 and IRF1/2/5/7/8/9 in macrophage states increased in severe COVID-19
patients151. Other hypotheses for future studies include lysosomal genes in dual positive lung
secretory and multiciliated cells, which may be consistent with putative “viral entry” cells, and
RIPK3 expression in the cell programs of airway cells, which opens the hypothesis of necroptosis
initiating a pro-inflammatory response. Interestingly, we observed relatively high enrichment of
ACE2 in secretory cell types (mucous cells and AT2 cells). We speculate that viruses may take
advantage of the rich secretory pathway components in these cells for their efficient dispersal.
Additionally, SMGs of the airways are recently shown to serve as reservoirs of reserve stem cells
152,153
. Therefore, we also speculate that SMGs similarly may serve as reservoirs for viruses where
they can escape from muco-ciliary transport and mechanical expulsion associated with severe
cough in the airway luminal surface.
The gene programs of AT2 cells can also contribute to cross talk with alveolar macrophages. Our
cell-cell interaction analysis suggests that AT2 cells engage with alveolar macrophages through
Oncostatin M, CSF, IL1 and complement pathways, suggesting therapeutic hypotheses. The
complement pathway is particularly intriguing in the context of COVID-19. First, viral protein
glycosylation is a known trigger for the lectin pathway (LP) of the proteolytic complement

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

cascade, such that in addition to classical complement activation via antibody complexes, other
coronavirus glycoproteins can be recognized by LP-inducing host collectin proteins154,155.
Moreover, excessive complement activation resulting in acute lung injury and cytokine storms
were also implicated in the pathogenesis of SARS156, and complement inhibition using the antiC5 antibody eculizumab157 is currently evaluated as anti-inflammatory experimental emergency
treatment for severe COVID-19 in clinical trials (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT04288713). In
our analysis, multiple complement pathway proteases (e.g. C1R, C2, CFI) are co-expressed with
ACE2 across different lung cell subsets (Fig. 6f,g, Extended Data Fig. 15) and complement
inhibitory factor CD55 and complement protease C3 were preferentially expressed by
ACE2+TMPRSS2+ DPs within lung tissue, in multiciliated and secretory cells, respectively (Fig.
4a,c, Supplementary Table 6, Supplementary Tables 7,8). Moreover, cell-cell interaction
analysis predicted cross-talk between AT2 cells expressing complement proteins C3 and C5 and
macrophages expressing cognate receptors. AT2 cell expression of negative complement
regulators CFI and CD55 might represent a strategy for SARS-CoV-2 to at least partially escape
complement surveillance.
Finally, to explore therapeutic hypotheses related to disruption of viral processing via protease
inhibition, we explored the expression of other proteases across our integrated atlases. Although a
multitude of different SARS-CoV-2 features likely account for its high pathogenicity and
transmissivity, it has been speculated that the PRRAR loop might contribute to increased COVID19 severity. Introduction of similar polybasic cleavage sites into avian influenza viruses and human
coronaviruses was shown to render them more pathogenic, increasing mortality and viral
spread158,159. One hypothesis is that acquisition of a PCSK cleavage site would expand the number
of cell types that can be directly infected by SARS-CoV-2. A recent report has started to address
expression of FURIN in cells expressing SARS-CoV-2 host factors ACE2 or TMPRSS247, and
FURIN activity is inhibited by Guanylate-binding proteins (GBPs), a group of interferonstimulated genes, in order to restrict viral envelope processing160. However, the highly overlapping
recognition sequence of PCSK family members (Extended Data Fig. 14d) suggests that multiple
PCSKs in addition to FURIN could mediate cleavage at the S1/S2 PRRAR motif (Extended Data
Fig. 14e). Our expression analysis confirms that PCSK family members, in particular FURIN,
PCSK5 and PCSK7, are more broadly expressed than TMPRSS2 across lung cell types (Fig. 6d),
as well as across tissues (Extended Data Fig. 14i). In the lung, we note the higher proportion of
ACE2+PCSK7+ basal cells and ACE2+PCSK7/5+ fibroblasts (Fig. 6e, Extended Data Fig. 14h).
Interestingly, the host interactome of SARS-CoV-2 further suggests interaction of viral proteins
with PCSK689, which also showed significant ACE2 co-expression in AT2 cells (Fig. 6b,
Extended Data Fig. 14b). Moreover, because PCSK localization is detected in different
membrane compartments along the secretory and endocytic pathways107, it is conceivable that
PCSKs could process SARS-CoV-2 S-proteins at different stages of the viral life cycle. Moreover,
further analysis is required to assess the extent to which SARS-CoV-2 relies on proteolytic activity
provided in trans either by neighboring cells or extracellularly localized proteases111. Altogether,
this could provide SARS-CoV-2 with an immense flexibility in different entry and egress
pathways.
Taken together, our analyses provide a rich molecular and cellular map as context for the
transmission, pathogenesis, clinical associations, and therapeutic hypotheses for COVID-19. As

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

new single cell atlases will be generated from COVID-19 tissues and experimental models, they
will help further advance our understanding of this disease.
METHODS
Patient samples
Sample collection underwent IRB review and approval at the institutions where the samples were
originally collected. “Adipose_Healthy_Manton_unpublished” was collected under
IRB
2007P002165/1(ORSP-3877). Tissue samples from breast, esophagus muscularis, esophagus
mucosa, heart, lung, prostate, skeletal muscle and skin referred to as
“Tissue_Healthy_Regev_snRNA-seq_unpublished” were collected under ORSP-3635. Samples
referred to as “Eye_Sanes_unpublished” were collected under Dana Farber / Harvard Cancer
Center Protocol Number 13-416 and Massachusetts Eye and Ear Protocol Number 18-034H.
Samples referred to as “Kidney_Healthy_Greka_unpublished” were collected under
Massachusetts General Hospital IRB number 2011P002692. Samples referred to as
“Liver_Healthy_Manton_unpublished” were collected under IRB 02-240; ORSP 1702 as well as
and ORSP-2630 under ORSP-2169. Lung samples from smokers and non-smokers with suffix
“Regev/Rajagopal_unpublished” were collected under Massachusetts General Hospital IRB
2012P001079 / (ORSP-3900) under ORSP-3490. Healthy and fibrotic lung samples with suffix
“Xavier_snRNA-seq_unpublished“ were collected under Massachusetts General Hospital IRB
number 2003P000555 (CG-5242) under ORSP-3490, Medoff, 2015P000319 (CG-5145) under
ORSP-3490. Pancreas PDAC samples were collected under Fernandez-del Castillo, 2003P001289
(CG-4692) under ORSP-3490 Massachusetts General Hospital IRB number Fernandez-del
Castillo, 2003P001289 (CG-4692) under ORSP-3490. Samples in the dataset “Barbry” were
derived from a study that was approved by the Comité de Protection des Personnes Sud Est IV
(approval number: 17/081) and informed written consent was obtained from all participants
involved. All experiments were performed during 8 months, in accordance with relevant guidelines
and French and European regulations. No deviations were made from our approved protocol
named 3Asc (An Atlas of Airways at a single cell level - ClinicalTrials.gov identifier:
NCT03437122). IPF and COPD lungs in the “Kaminski” dataset were obtained from patients
undergoing transplant while healthy lungs were from rejected donor lung organs that underwent
lung transplantation at the Brigham and Women’s Hospital or donor organs provided by the
National Disease Research Interchange (NDRI). Patient tissues relating to the dataset “Krasnow”
were obtained under a protocol approved by Stanford University’s Human Subjects Research
Compliance Office (IRB 15166) and informed consent was obtained from each patient prior to
surgery. The study protocol was approved by the Partners Healthcare Institutional Board Review
(IRB Protocol # 2011P002419). Samples in the dataset “Kropski_Banovich” were collected under
Vanderbilt IRB # 060165, 171657, and Western IRB#20181836. Ethics approval number
2018/769-31. “Meyer_b” were collected under CBTM (Cambridge Biorepository for Translational
Medicine), research ethics approval number: UK NHS REC approval reference number
15/EE/0152. Samples in the dataset “Linnarsson” are covered by (2018/769-31) approved by the
Swedish Ethical Review Authority. Samples in the “Misharin” dataset were collected under
(STU00056197, STU00201137, and STU00202458) approved by the Northwestern University
Institutional Review Board. Samples in the “Rawlins” dataset were obtained from terminations of

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

pregnancy from Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust under permission from
NHS Research Ethical Committee (96/085) and the Joint MRC/Wellcome Trust Human
Developmental Biology Resource (grant R/R006237/1, www.hdbr.org, HDBR London: REC
approval 18/LO/0822; HDBR Newcastle: REC approval 18/NE/0290). The studies relating to
datasets “Schultze” and “Schultze_Falk” were approved by the ethics committees of the University
of Bonn and University hospital Bonn (local ethics vote 076/16) and the Medizinische Hochschule
Hannover (local ethics vote 7414/2017). Fifteen human tracheal airway epithelia in the “Schultze”
dataset were isolated from de-identified donors whose lungs were not suitable for transplantation.
Lung specimens were obtained from the International Institute for the Advancement of Medicine
(Edison, NJ) and the Donor Alliance of Colorado. The National Jewish Health Institutional Review
Board (IRB) approved the research under IRB protocols HS-3209 and HS-2240. Donor lungs
samples in the “Xu/Whittset” dataset were provided through the federal United Network of Organ
Sharing via the National Disease Research Interchange (NDRI) and International Institute for
Advancement of Medicine (IIAM) and entered into the NHLBI LungMAP Biorepository for
Investigations of Diseases of the Lung (BRINDL) at the University of Rochester Medical Center,
overseen by the IRB as RSRB00047606. Samples in the “Xu/Whitsett” dataset were provided
through the federal United Network of Organ Sharing via the National Disease Research
Interchange (NDRI) and International Institute for Advancement of Medicine (IIAM) and entered
into the NHLBI LungMAP Biorepository for Investigations of Diseases of the Lung (BRINDL) at
the University of Rochester Medical Center, overseen by the IRB as RSRB00047606.
(Supplementary Table 1, 2)
Integrated analysis of published datasets
Publicly available single-cell RNA-seq datasets were downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus
(GEO)161. We searched GEO for datasets that met all of the following three criteria: (1) provided
unnormalized count data; (2) was generated using the 10X Genomics’s Chromium platform162;
and (3) profiled human samples. These tissue samples spanned a wide range, including primary
tissues, cultured cell lines, and chemically or genetically perturbed samples. Applying these filters
increases standardization of sample as the vast majority were prepared using the same 10X
Chromium instrument and Cell Ranger pipelines.
Datasets comprise of one or more samples (individual gene expression matrices), which often
correspond to individual experiments or patient samples. In total, this yielded 2,333,199 cells from
469 samples from 64 distinct datasets (Supplementary Table 1). To allow comparison across
samples and datasets, we mapped through a common dictionary of gene symbols and excluded
unrecognized symbols. If a gene from an aggregated master list was not found in a sample, the
expression was considered to be zero for every cell in that sample.
After all datasets were collected, we quantified the percentage of cells with >0 UMIs for both
ACE2 and TMPRSS2 or ACE2 and CTSL. For further analyses with broad cell classes, we only
used datasets with more than 15 double positive cells yielding 252,871 cells from 40 samples.
For integration across datasets, we used two levels of annotations. When possible, every sample
was annotated with its tissue of origin based on the available metadata from GEO. We excluded
any sample for which tissue was not specified. For the smaller subset of 252,871 cells we then

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

manually annotated cell clusters with broad cell type classes using marker genes. These clusters
were generated using the harmony-pytorch Python implementation (version 0.1.1
(https://github.com/lilab-bcb/harmony-pytorch 163) of the Harmony scRNA-seq integration
method164 for batch correction and leiden clustering from the Scanpy package (version 1.4.5)165.
Clusters without clear markers distinguishing types were excluded from further analysis.
Data was processed using Scanpy. Individual datasets were normalized log (UMIs/10,000 +1) by
column sum and the log1p function (ln(10,000 * gij + 1) where a gene’s expression profile, g, is
the result of the UMI count for each gene, i, for cell j, normalized by the sum of all UMI counts
for cell j. This data normalization step was only used for generating the clusters and cell type
annotations.
All other statistical tests for the integrated analysis were performed on the cell’s binary
classification as a double positive or not. For example, for a cell to be considered ACE2+, it has
>0 ACE2 transcripts. Double positive cells have >0 transcripts for both genes of interest. We used
Fisher's exact test to test for statistical dependence between the expression of ACE2 and TMPRSS2
or CTSL and corrected for multiple testing via Benjamini-Hochberg over all tests for each gene
pair.
Integrated co-expression analysis of high resolution cell annotations across tissues
We compiled a compendium of published and unpublished datasets consisting of 2,433,890 cells
from 21 tissues and/or organs including adipose, bone marrow, brain, breast, colon, cord blood,
enteric nervous system, esophagus mucosa, esophagus muscularis, anterior eye, heart, kidney,
liver, lung, nasal, olfactory epithelium, pancreas, placenta, prostate, skeletal muscle and skin. After
the harmonization of cell type annotations, ACE2-TMPRSS2 and ACE2-CTSL coexpression were
assessed using a logistic mixed effect model:
𝑌" ∼ 𝐴𝐶𝐸2 + (1 | 𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒_𝑖𝑑)

(1)

where Yi was the binarized expression level of either TMPRSS2 or CTSL, and covariates were
binarized ACE2 expression in cell i and a sample-level random intercept.
Models were fit separately for each cell type in each dataset. In order to avoid spurious associations
in cell types with very few ACE2+ cells and due to very low expression of ACE2, we subsampled
ACE2- cells to the number of ACE2+ cells within each cell type and discarded cell types containing
fewer than 5 cells expressing either ACE2 or fewer than 5 cells expressing the other gene being
tested after the subsampling procedure. The significance of the association between ACE2 and
TMPRSS2/CTSL is controlled for 10% FDR using the statsmodels Python package (version
0.11.1)166. Data processing was performed using Scanpy Python package (version 1.4.6)165 and
logistic models were fit using lme4 R package (version 1.1.21)167.
Single-cell ATAC-Seq analysis
Library Generation and Sequencing. Libraries were generated using the 10x Chromium Controller
and the Chromium Single Cell ATAC Library & Gel Bead Kit (#1000111) according to the

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

manufacturer’s instructions (CG000169-Rev C; CG000168-Rev B) with unpublished
modifications relating to cell handling and processing. Briefly, human lung derived primary cells
were processed in 1.5ml DNA LoBind tubes (Eppendorf), washed in PBS via centrifugation at
400g, 5 min, 4C, lysed for 3 min on ice before washing via centrifugation at 500g, 5 min, 4C. The
supernatant was discarded and lysed cells were diluted in 1x Diluted Nuclei buffer (10x Genomics)
before counting using Trypan Blue and a Countess II FL Automated Cell Counter to validate lysis.
If large cell clumps were observed, a 40µm Flowmi cell strainer was used prior to the tagmentation
reaction, followed by Gel Bead-In-Emulsions (GEMs) generation and linear PCR as described in
the protocol. After breaking the GEMs, the barcoded tagmented DNA was purified and further
amplified to enable sample indexing and enrichment of scATAC-seq libraries. The final libraries
were quantified using a Qubit dsDNA HS Assay kit (Invitrogen) and a High Sensitivity DNA chip
run on a Bioanalyzer 2100 system (Agilent).
All libraries were sequenced using Nextseq High Output Cartridge kits and a Nextseq 500
sequencer (Illumina). 10x scATAC-seq libraries were sequenced paired end (2 x 72 cycles).
Initial data processing and QC. Fastq files were demultiplexed using 10x Genomics CellRanger
ATAC mkfastq (version 1.1.0). We obtained peak-barcode matrices by aligning reads to GRCh38
(CR v1.2.0 pre-built reference) using CellRanger ATAC count. Peak-barcode matrices from six
channels were normalized per sequencing depth and pooled using CellRanger ATAC aggr.
The aggregated, depth-normalized, filtered dataset was analyzed with Signac (v0.1.6,
https://github.com/timoast/signac), a Seurat168 extension developed for the analysis of
scATAC-seq data. All the analyses in Signac were run with a random number generator
seed set as 1234. Cells that appeared as outliers in QC metrics (peak_region_fragments
≤ 750 or peak_region_fragments ≥ 20,000 or blacklist_ratio ≥ 0.025 or nucleosome_signal
≥ 10 or TSS.enrichment ≤ 2) were excluded from the analysis.
Normalization and dimensionality reduction. The aggregated dataset was processed with Latent
Semantic Indexing169, i.e. datasets were normalized using term frequency-inverse document
frequency (TF-IDF), then singular value decomposition (SVD), ran on all binary features, was
used to embed cells in low-dimensional space. Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection
(UMAP)170 was then applied for visualization, using the first 30 dimensions of the SVD space.
Gene activity matrix and differential motif activity analysis. A gene activity matrix was calculated
as the chromatin accessibility associated with each gene locus (extended to include 2kb upstream
of the transcription start site, as described in the vignette ‘Analyzing PBMC scATAC-seq’
(version: March 13, 2020, https://satijalab.org/signac/articles/pbmc_vignette.html), using as gene
annotation the genes.gtf file provided together with Cellranger’s atac GRCh38-1.2.0 reference
genome.
Clusters were annotated using label transfer from matching scRNA samples or by literature / expert
search of marker “active” (i.e. accessible) genes. Differential motif activity analysis was performed
using Signac’s implementation of ChromVAR93, with motif position frequency matrices from
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

JASPAR2020171 (http://jaspar.genereg.net/) selecting transcription factors motifs from human
(species=9606), broadly following the vignette ‘Motif analysis with Signac’
(https://satijalab.org/signac/articles/motif_vignette.html). Cells were identified as positive for
ACE2 and/or TMPRSS2 (i.e. with the loci accessible) if at least one fragment was overlapping with
the gene locus or 2kb upstream. Differential activity scores between epithelial cells positive for
ACE2 (with the above-mentioned definition of ‘positive’) and non-expressing ACE2 was
performed with the FindMarkers function of Seurat (version 3.1.1), using as test ‘LR’ (i.e. logistic
regression) and as latent variable the number of counts in peak.
Analysis of ENCODE bulk-RNAseq datasets
The following publically available bulk-RNAseq datasets were obtained from the ENCODE
database: LID20728; LID20729; LID47030; LID47031; LID47036; LID47037; LID21040;
LID21041; LID47032; LID47033; LID20870; LID20871; LID20872; LID20873; LID21183;
LID21184; LID21042; LID21043; LID20920; LID20921; LID20924; LID20925; LID20821;
LID20822; LID46983; LID46984; LID20819; LID20820; LID21038; LID21039; LID20732;
LID20733; LID20868; LID20869; LID20922; LID20923, generated by the Gingeras lab172. These
FASTQ datasets were aligned to the MM9 annotation build using STAR and processed using the
standard Tuxedo Suite to yield a normalized FPKM matrix.
Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemistry analysis was performed on 4% PFA fixed, OCT embedded tissue sections
from human explant donors. Briefly, cells were permeabilized with 5% Triton-X in PBS. Slides
were either not treated with antigen retrieval or antigen retrieval was performed with the TrisCitrate buffer as needed (Supplementary Table 4). Slides were incubated overnight with primary
antibodies at indicated concentrations (Supplementary Table 4) in donkey serum with 5% TritonX in PBS. Slides were treated with Alexa-Fluor secondary antibodies mixed with DAPI at 1:500
concentration in donkey serum with 5% Triton-X in PBS for 1 hour at room temperature. Slides
were mounted and imaged on a confocal microscope.
Proximity ligation in situ hybridization (PLISH)
Proximity ligation in situ hybridization (PLISH) was performed as described previously173.
Briefly, frozen human trachea and distal lung sections were fixed with 4.0% paraformaldehyde for
20 min, treated with protease (20 µg/mL proteinase K for lung or Pepsin for trachea for 9 min) at
37°C, and dehydrated with up-series of ethanol. The sections were incubated with gene-specific
oligos (Supplementary Table 11) in hybridization buffer (1 M sodium trichloroacetate, 50 mM
Tris [pH 7.4], 5 mM EDTA, 0.2 mg/mL heparin) for 2 h at 37°C. Common bridge and circle probes
were added to the section and incubated for 1 h followed by T4 ligase reaction for 2 h. Rolling
circle amplification was performed by using phi29 polymerase (#30221, Lucigen) for 12 hours at
37°C. Fluorophore-conjugated detection probe was applied and incubated for 30 min at 37°C
followed by mounting in medium containing DAPI.
Integrated analysis for association of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 expression with age, sex or
smoking status in nasal, airways and lung cells
To assess the association of age, sex, and smoking status with the expression of ACE2, TMPRSS2,
and CTSL, we aggregated 22 scRNA-seq datasets of healthy human nasal and lung cells, as well
as fetal samples. Aggregation of these datasets was enabled by harmonizing the cell type labels of
24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

individual datasets within Scanpy165 (version 1.4.5.1). We harmonized annotations together with
data contributors using a preliminary ontology generated on the basis of 5 published datasets63–
66,174
with 3 levels of annotations (level 1 - lowest resolution; Supplementary Table 2). We further
harmonized metadata by collapsing the smoking covariate into “has smoked” and “has never
smoked” and by taking mean ages where only age ranges were given. This endeavor produced a
dataset of 1,176,683 cells in 282 samples from 164 donors (Supplementary Data D3). We divided
the data into fetal (136,742 cells, 41 samples, 32 donors), adult nasal (32,881 cells, 12 samples, 12
donors), and adult lung (1,007,060 cells, 229 samples, 127 donors) datasets based on metadata
provided.
To get an overview of sample diversity, we clustered the samples using the proportion of cells in
level 2 cell types as features. Clustering was performed using louvain clustering (resolution 0.3;
louvain package version 0.6.1) on a knn-graph (k=15) computed on Euclidean distances over the
top 5 principal components of the cell type proportion data within Scanpy. This produced five
clusters. Sample cluster labels were assigned based on metadata for anatomical location that was
obtained from the published datasets and via input from the data generators.
Within adult datasets we modeled the association of age, sex, and smoking status with gene
expression for ACE2, TMPRSS2, and CTSL using a generalized linear model with the log total
counts per cell as offset and Poisson noise as implemented in statsmodels166 (version 0.11.1) and
using a Wald test from Diffxpy (www.github.com/theislab/diffxpy; version 0.7.3, batchglm
version 0.7.4). Specifically we used the model:
𝑌"5 ∼ 𝑎𝑔𝑒 + 𝑠𝑒𝑥 + 𝑎𝑔𝑒: 𝑠𝑒𝑥 + 𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔 + 𝑠𝑒𝑥: 𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔 + 𝑎𝑔𝑒: 𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔 + 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑡
(2)
Here, 𝑌"5 denotes the raw count expression of gene i in cell j and age:sex, sex:smoking, and
age:smoking are interaction terms of the three modeled covariates. These terms model whether
there is a difference in the smoking effect in men and women, and likewise whether the age effect
is different for smokers and non-smokers. While we model these interaction terms, we only tested
age, sex, and smoking effects individually to reduce the multiple testing burden. We included the
dataset term to model the batch effects between the diverse datasets we obtained, and the log total
counts per cell was used as an offset. Here, the total counts were scaled to have a mean of 1 across
all cells before the log was taken. In order to fit this model we pruned the data to contain only
datasets that have at least 2 donors and for which smoking status metadata was provided. This
resulted in a dataset of 761,693 cells and 165 samples from 77 donors for adult lung data. Only a
single dataset remained for adult nasal data after this filtering on which the model could not be fit.
To obtain cell-type specific associations the above model was fit within each cell type for all cell
types with at least 1,000 cells. We performed Wald tests over the age and sex covariates
independently and corrected for multiple testing via Benjamini-Hochberg over all tests within a
cell type.
As metadata on smoking status was only available for a subset of the data, we also fitted a simpler
model on a larger dataset to confirm sex and age associations. The simplified model:
𝑌"5 ∼ 𝑎𝑔𝑒 + 𝑠𝑒𝑥 + 𝑎𝑔𝑒: 𝑠𝑒𝑥 + 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑡

(3)
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

was fit on 986,342 cells in 225 samples from 125 donors of adult lung data. Again, log total counts
(scaled) was used as an offset.
The above models treat cells as independent observations and thus model cellular and donor
variation jointly. As donor variation tends to be larger than single-cell variation, when most cells
come from few donors (either there are few donors, or few donors contribute most of the cells),
this can lead to an inflation of p-values. To counteract this effect, we verified that significant
associations are consistent when modeling only donor variation via pseudo-bulk analysis, and we
tested whether effects are dependent on few donors by holding out datasets.
Pseudo-bulk data was generated by computing the mean for each gene expression value and nUMI
covariate for cells in the same cell type and donor. After filtering as described above, models (2)
and (3) were fit to the data. In contrast to the single-cell model, pseudo-bulk analysis
underestimates certainty in modeled effects as uncertainty in the pseudo-bulk means are not taken
into account. Thus, we used only effect directions from pseudo-bulk analysis to validate singlecell associations. We regarded only those associations as significant, where the FDR-corrected pvalue in the single-cell model is below 0.05, and the sign of the estimated effect is consistent in
both the single-cell and the pseudo-bulk analysis.
We further separated significant associations into robust trends and indications depending on the
holdout analysis. A significant association was regarded as a robust trend if the effect direction is
consistent when holding out any dataset when fitting the model irrespective of p-value. In the case
that holding out one dataset caused the maximum likelihood estimate of the coefficient to be
reversed, we denote this as the effect no longer being present, which characterized the association
as an indication.
Identification of gene programs using feature importances for a random forest trained to
classify ACE2+TMPRSS2+ vs ACE2-TMPRSS2- cells
For each of the lung, nasal, and gut datasets, we labeled the cells with non-zero counts for both
ACE2 and TMPRSS2 as dual-positive cells (DPs), and the cells with zero counts for both ACE2
and TMPRSS2 as dual-negative cells (DNs). Within each tissue, we identified cell types with
greater than 10 DPs, and for each of these cell types, we selected the genes with increased
expression (log fold change greater than 0) in DPs vs DNs (so that we focus on important
”positive” features). We trained a classifier with 75:25 train:test split to classify the DPs from DNs
within each of these cell types using the sklearn (version 0.21.3)175 RandomForestClassifier
function with the following parameters: n_estimators set to 100, the criterion as gini, and the
class_weight parameter set to balanced_subsample. We first trained individual classifiers
separately for each of the cell types, and pooled genes with positive feature importance values
(using the feature_importance176 field in the trained RandomForestClassifier object) to train a final
DP vs DN classifier across each tissue. We used the top 500 genes, as ranked by their feature
importance scores, to define the signature for the gene expression program of DPs for the tissue.
This procedure was carried out in lung, nasal, and gut datasets, yielding tissue-specific signatures
for gene expression programs of DPs from each tissue.

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

For visualization purposes only, we generated network diagrams using the networkx (version
2.2)177 tool with the ForceAtlas2 graph layout algorithm178. We scored genes that appeared in
signatures for multiple tissues by their aggregated feature importance (using a plotting heuristic
that used the sum of importance ranks for genes in individual tissues and by assigning a large
valued rank (10000) to a gene that did not appear in a particular tissue) and selected the top 10
genes that were shared by each pair of tissues or shared by all tissues along with additional genes
that included the ones unique to each tissue’s signature to plot in the network visualization. The
GO terms enriched in the gene expression programs shared by DPs across tissues were found using
gprofiler (version 1.0.0)179 using the scanpy.queries.enrich tool.
This analysis was performed in two ways: on the original data, as well as after accounting for
differences in distribution of the number of UMIs (nUMI) per cell between DPs and DNs. This
was done by binning the nUMI distribution in the DPs for each tissue into a 100 bins and then
randomly sampling from the nUMI distribution for the DNs in each bin to match the distribution
of the DPs in that bin. The nUMI distributions before and after the matching are shown in
Extended Data Fig. 10b.
Identification of gene programs enriched in DP vs. DN cells using regression
In parallel, we used a regression framework to recover gene modules enriched in DP vs. DN cells
(Fig. 4c,d, Extended Data Fig. 11a,b) in the nasal, lung, and gut datasets. We first restricted our
analysis to cell subsets derived from at least two donor individuals that each contained a mixture
of DN and DP cells (Nawijn Nasal: multiciliated, Goblet; Regev/Rajagopal Lung: AT1, AT2,
Basal, multiciliated, Secretory; Aggregated Lung: AT2, multiciliated, Secretory; Regev/Xavier
Colon: BEST4+ Enterocytes, Cycling TA (Transit Amplifying), Enterocytes, Immature
Enterocytes 2, TA-2). For each of these cell subsets, we then used MAST (version 1.8.2)180 to fit
the following regression model to every gene with cells as observations:
𝑌" ∼ 𝑋 + (1|𝑆),
where Yi is the expression level of gene i in cells, measured in units of log2(TP10K+1), X is the
binary co-expression state of each cell (i.e. DP vs. DN), and S is the donor that each cell was
isolated from. To control for donor-specific effects (i.e. batch effects), we used a mixed model
with a random intercept that varies for each donor. To fit this model, we subsampled cells from
DP and DN groups to ensure that both the donor distribution and the cell complexity (i.e. the
number of genes per cell) were evenly matched between the two groups, as follows. First, for each
subset, we restricted our analysis to donors containing at least two DN and two DP cells. Using
these samples, we partitioned the cells into 10 equally-sized bins based on cell complexity and
subsampled DN cells from each bin to match the cell complexity distribution of the DP cells.
Finally, we fit the mixed model (above), controlling for both donor and cell complexity.
To build gene modules for DP cells, we prioritized genes by requiring that they be expressed in at
least 10% of DP cells, and to have a model coefficient greater than 0 with an FDR-adjusted pvalue less than 0.05 (for the combined coefficient in the hurdle model). After this filtering step,
genes were ranked by their model coefficient (i.e. estimated effect size). The top 12 genes were
selected for network visualization within each cell type (Fig. 4c,d, Extended Data Fig. 11a,b). In

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

three cases (gut Cycling TA, TA-2 and BEST4+ cells), RP11-* antisense genes were flagged and
excluded from visualizations. To visualize overlap across each network, we indicated whether each
gene was among the top 250 genes from each of the other cell types. Putative drug targets were
identified by querying the Drugbank database88. Gene set enrichment analysis was performed
using the R package EnrichR (version 1.0)181, selecting the top 25 genes from each cell type for
the pan-tissue analysis (“All” category; Fig. 4e), and the top 50 genes from each cell type for the
tissue-specific analyses (“Gut”, “Nasal”, and “Lung” categories; Fig. 4e). We note a few
caveats/challenges/limitations that may influence our results, including non uniform sampling
across donors; variation in cell compositions across regions (e.g., distal lung vs carina), and
additional cellular heterogeneity that the current level of broad subset annotation may not have
been captured.
Cell-Cell interaction analysis
CellphoneDB96 v.2.0.0 was run with default parameters on the 10 human lung samples of the
Regev/Rajagopal dataset, analyzing the cells from each dissected region separately. For each
sample (patient/location combination), for each cell type we distinguished double positive cells
(ACE2 > 0 and TMPRSS2 > 0) from all others. Only interactions highlighted as significant, i.e.
present in the “significant means” output from CellphoneDB were considered.
Co-expression patterns of additional proteases and IL6/IL6R/IL6ST
ACE2-protease co-expression (Figure 6, Extended Data Fig. 14) and ACE2-IL6/IL6R/IL6ST coexpression (Extended Data Fig. 12) were tested via the logistic mixed-effects model described in
“Integrated co-expression analysis of high resolution cell annotations across tissues” (Equation 1,
above).
Code availability
Data and an interactive analysis examining the co-expression of genes across datasets can be
accessed via the open-source data platform, Terra at https://app.terra.bio/#workspaces/kcoincubator/COVID-19_cross_tissue_analysis.
Data availability
Interactive visualization and download of gene expression data can be accessed on the Single Cell
Portal at https://singlecell.broadinstitute.org/single_cell?scpbr=hca-covid-19-integrated-analysis
Conflict of interest statement
N.K. was a consultant to Biogen Idec, Boehringer Ingelheim, Third Rock, Pliant, Samumed,
NuMedii, Indaloo, Theravance, LifeMax, Three Lake Partners, Optikira and received nonfinancial support from MiRagen. All of these outside the work reported. J.L. is a scientific
28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

consultant for 10X Genomics Inc A.R. is a co-founder and equity holder of Celsius Therapeutics,
an equity holder in Immunitas, and an SAB member of ThermoFisher Scientific, Syros
Pharmaceuticals, Asimov, and Neogene Therapeutics O.R.R., is a co-inventor on patent
applications filed by the Broad Institute to inventions relating to single cell genomics applications,
such as in PCT/US2018/060860 and US Provisional Application No. 62/745,259. A.K.S.
compensation for consulting and SAB membership from Honeycomb Biotechnologies, Cellarity,
Cogen Therapeutics, Orche Bio, and Dahlia Biosciences. S.A.T. was a consultant at Genentech,
Biogen and Roche in the last three years. F.J.T. reports receiving consulting fees from Roche
Diagnostics GmbH, and ownership interest in Cellarity Inc. L.V. is funder of Definigen and
Bilitech two biotech companies using hPSCs and organoid for disease modelling and cell based
therapy.

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

FIGURE LEGENDS
Figure 1. A cross-tissue survey of ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells shows enrichment in cells at
reported sites of disease transmission or pathogenesis.
(a,b) Dual positive cells are more prevalent in epithelial organs and cells. (a) Proportion of
ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells (y axis) per dataset (dots) from 21 tissues and organs (rows). (b)
Proportion of ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells (y axis) within cell clusters (dots) annotated by broad celltype categories (rows) within each of the top 7 enriched datasets (color legend, inset). (c,d)
Significant co-expression of ACE2+TMPRSS2+ or ACE2+CTSL+ highlights cells from tissues
implicated in transmission or pathogenesis. Significance of co-expression (dot size log10(adjusted P-value), Methods; red border: FDR<0.1) of ACE2+TMPRSS2+ (c) or
ACE2+CTSL+ (d) and effect size (dot color, color bar) for finely annotated cell classes (columns)
from diverse tissues (rows). Only tissues and cells in at least one significant co-expression
relationship are shown (Methods). (e-i) In situ validation of dual positive cells in the lung, airways,
and submucosal gland. (e-g) PLISH and immunostaining in human adult lung alveoli for (e) ACE2
(white), TMPRSS2 (green) and CTSL (red), (f) ACE2 (white), TMPRSS2 (green) and HTII-280
(red), (g) ACE2 (red) and Pro-SFTPC (green). (h) PLISH and immunostaining in human large
airway submucosal glands. ACE2 (red), ACTA2 (green) and DAPI (blue). (i) PLISH in human
adult large airway. ACE2 (green) and DAPI (blue).
Figure 2. Open chromatin at the ACE2 and TMPRSS2 loci in AT2, ciliated and secretory
cells in the lung and airways
(a,c) Single-cell ATAC-seq of lung samples from primary carina (1C) and subpleural parenchyme
(RPL) (n=1 patient, k=3 samples, 3,366 cells from 1C, 8,340 cells from RPL). Uniform Manifold
Approximation and Projection (UMAP) embedding of scATAC-seq profiles (dots) colored by (a,
left) cell types, (a, right) cells with at least 1 fragment (indicating accessibility, open chromatin)
mapping to the ACE2 gene locus (defined as -2kb upstream the Transcription Start Site to
Transcription End Site), or by sample location (c). Grey shaded area: epithelial cell types. (b)
Inferred gene activity of ACE2, TMPRSS2, CTSL across cell types. Log normalized mean
“scATAC activity score” (quantified from accessibility, open chromatin) (dot color) and
proportion of cells with active scores (dot size) for ACE2, TMPRSS2, and CTSL (columns) across
different cell types (rows) from the primary carina (1C) and subpleural parenchyme (RPL). (d)
Some AT2, ciliated and secretory cells have accessible chromatin at both ACE2 and TMPRSS2
loci. Proportion of cells (x axis) in each cell type (y axis) with accessible chromatin (at least 1
fragment) at both the ACE2 and TMPRSS2 loci (defined as -2kb upstream of the Transcription
Start Site to Transcription End Site).
Figure 3. ACE2, TMPRSS2, and CTSL expression in AT2 cells increases with age and
smoking status, and in men

(a) Samples in the aggregated lung and airway dataset partition to several classes by their cell
composition. Percentage of cells (y axis) by level 2 cell annotations (Annotations with a preceding
“1” indicate coarse annotations) across samples (x axis). The 282 samples are ordered by sample
composition clusters. (b) Schematic of key lung and airway cell types highlighted in the study. (c)
Statistical model. Model fitted to the data to assess sex, age, and smoking status associations with
expression of the three genes. Yi,j denotes gene counts and nUMI denotes the total UMI counts per
cell. (d) Age, sex, and smoking status associations with expression of ACE2 (blue), TMPRSS2
30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

(orange), and CTSL (green) in epithelial cells. Effect size (x axis) of the association, in log fold
change (sex, smoking status) or slope of log expression with age. Colored bars: associations with
an FDR-corrected p-value<0.05, where pseudo-bulk analysis shows a consistent effect direction.
Error bars: standard errors around coefficient estimates. (e) Distribution of ACE2 and TMPRSS2
expression across level 3 lung cell types. Red shading indicates the main cell types that express
ACE2 and TMPRSS2. (f) Hold out analysis shows the robustness of associations to holding out a
dataset. The values show the number of held-out datasets that result in loss of association between
a given covariate (rows) and ACE2, TMPRSS2, or CTSL expression in a given cell type (columns).
Robust trends are determined by significant effects that are robust to holding out any dataset (0
values). (g) Low expression in pediatric samples. Mean expression level (log CPM, y axis) of
ACE2 (blue), TMPRSS2 (orange), and CTSL (green) across age bins (x axis) in AT2 (left) and
ciliated (right) cells. Pediatric samples: 0-10 years. Samples from past or current smokers were
removed from this plot to avoid smoking confounders. Error bars are omitted due to y-axis
limitations. They are typically 10-fold the mean value (Supplementary Table 5). Multiciliated and
AT2 cells are shown as these cell types are present in fetal data, and show significant age
associations with ACE2 expression.
Figure 4: Tissue and cell-type-specific gene modules in ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells highlight
immune and inflammatory features
(a,b) Tissue programs of ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells in lung, gut, and nasal samples. (a) Selected
tissue program genes. Node: gene; Edge: program membership. Genes are selected heuristically
for visualization (Methods). (b) Enrichment (-log10(adj P-value), x axis) of KEGG pathway gene
sets (y axis) in the full tissue programs. (c-e) Cell programs of ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells. (c,d) Top
12 genes from each cell program recovered for different lung (c) or (d) nasal epithelial cell-type
(nodes, colors). Colored concentric circles: overlap with a gene in the top 250 significant genes in
other cell types. ACE2 and TMPRSS2 are included even if not among the top 12. (e) Enrichment
(-log10(adj P-value), x axis) of KEGG disease and non-disease pathway gene sets in either highly
significant genes across all tissues (top) or in specific tissues (lung, nose, bottom). (f) Motif activity
in immune TFs in ACE2+ cells. Significance (-log10(adjusted p-value), x axis) of the top 10
differential “motif activity scores” (Methods) between epithelial ACE2+ cells or ACE2- cells (y
axis). (Epithelial cells are: AT1, AT2, secretory, ciliated, ionocytes, and neuroendocrine cells,
highlighted in the gray shaded area in Fig. 2c). (n=2 locations: primary carina and lung lobes, n=3
samples per location, n=1 patient). Motifs are extracted from the JASPAR2020 database, motif
code is shown in each row. Dashed line: threshold for significance (adjusted p-value of 0.05).
Figure 5: Ace2, Tmprss2 and Ctsl2 expression in similar cell types and follows similar
patterns with age and smoking. (a) Gradual increase in Ace2 expression by airway epithelial
cell type with age. Mean expression (y axis) of Ace2 in different airway epithelial cells (x axis) of
mice of three consecutive ages (color legend, upper right). Shown are replicate mice (dots), mean
(bar), and error bars (standard error of the mean (SEM)). (b) Increase in proportion of Ace2+Ctsl+
goblet and club cells with age. Percent of Ace2+Ctsl+ cells (x axis) in different airway epithelial cell
types (y axis) of mice of three consecutive ages (color legend, upper right). Shown are replicate
mice (dots), mean (bar), and error bars (SEM). (c-j) Increase in Ace2 expression in secretory cells
with smoking. Mice were daily exposed to cigarette smoke or filtered air as control for two months
after which cells from whole lung suspensions were analyzed by scRNA-seq (Drop-Seq). (c,d)

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

UMAP of scRNA-seq profiles (dots) colored by experimental group (c) or by Ace2+ cells and
indicated double positive cells (d). Alveolar epithelial cells (AT1 and AT2) and airway epithelial
secretory and ciliated cells are marked. (e) The relative frequency of Ace2+ cells is increased by
smoking in airway secretory cells but not AT2 cells. Relative proportion (y axis) of Ace2+ (red) and
Ace2- (grey) cells in smoking and control mice of different cell types (x axis). (f, g) Expression of
Ace2 is increased in airway secretory cells, but not in AT2 cells. Distribution of Ace2 expression
(y axis) in secretory (f) and AT2 (g) cells from control and smoking mice (x axis). (h-j) Re-analysis
of published bulk mRNA-Seq101 of lungs exposed to different daily doses of cigarette smoke show
increased expression of (h) Ace2, (i) Tmprss2, and (j) Ctsl after five months of chronic exposure.
(k) Expression in placenta. UMAP plots showing expression of Ace2, Tmprss2 and Ctsl in single
and double positive cells from embryonic days 9.5 to 18 (left) and embryonic day 14.5 (right) of
mouse placenta development

Figure 6. ACE2-protease co-expression and SARS-CoV-2 S-protein cleavage sites suggest a
possible role for additional proteases in infection.
(a) Multiple proteases are co-expressed with ACE2 in human lung scRNA-seq. Scatter plot of
significance (y axis, -log10(adjusted P value)) and effect size (x axis) of co-expression of each
protease gene (dot) with ACE within each indicated epithelial cell type (color). Dashed line:
significance threshold. TMPRSS2 and PCSKs that significantly co-expressed with ACE2 are
marked. (b) ACE2-protease co-expression with PCSKs, TMPRSS2 and CTSL across lung cell
types. Significance (dot size, -log10(adjusted P value)) and effect size (color) for co-expression of
ACE2 with selected proteases (columns) across cell types (rows). (c,d) Multiple proteases are
expressed across lung cell types. (c) Distribution of expression (y axis) for ACE2, PCSKs and
TMPRSS2 across lung cell types (x axis). White dot: median expression. (d) Proportion of cells (y
axis) expressing ACE2, PCSK family or TMPRSS2 across lung cell types (x axis), ordered by
compartment. (e) ACE2+PCSK+ dual positive cells across lung cell types. Fraction (y axis) of
different ACE2+PCSK+ or ACE2+TMPRSS2+ dual positive cells across lung cell types (x axis).
Dots: different individuals, line: median. (f) ACE2-protease co-expression analysis for the 20 most
significant human proteases in AT2 cells. Significance (dot size, -log10(adjusted P value)) and
effect size (color) for co-expression of ACE2 with different proteases (columns) across cell types
(rows). (g) Additional protease expression in ACE2+TMPRSS2+ dual positive cells. Significance
(y axis) and fold change (x axis) of differential expression for each human protease between
ACE2+TMPRSS2+ dual positive vs dual negative cells within each indicated epithelial cell types
(color). The top 20 most significantly differentially expressed proteases within AT2 cells and
PCSKs across all epithelial cell types are highlighted.
Extended Data Figures
Extended Data Figure 1. A cross-tissue survey of ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells in published singlecell datasets.
(a) Odds ratio (x axis) of ACE2+TMPRSS2+ co-expression in single-cell datasets (dots) from
different tissues (y axis). (b) Significance (-log10(p-value), x axis) of co-expression of
ACE2+TMPRSS2+ in single-cell datasets (dots) from different tissues (y axis). (c,d) Proportion (x
axis) of ACE2+ cells per dataset (c) and TMPRSS2+ cells per dataset (d) across different tissues (y
axis).

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Figure 2. A cross-tissue survey of ACE2+CTSL+ cells in published single-cell
datasets.
(a) Proportion (x axis) of ACE2+CTSL+ cells per dataset (dots) across different tissues (y axis). (b)
Proportion (x axis) of ACE2+CTSL+ cells within clusters annotated by broad cell-type categories
(dots) in each of the top 7 enriched datasets (y axis; color legend, inset). (c) Odds ratio (x axis) of
ACE2+CTSL+ co-expression in single-cell datasets (dots) from different tissues (y axis). (d)
Significance (-log10(p-value), x axis) of co-expression of ACE2 and CTSL in single-cell datasets
(dots) from different tissues (y axis). (e) Proportion (x axis) of CTSL+ cells per dataset across
different tissues (y axis).
Extended Data Figure 3. Cellular composition and fraction of ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells across
the integrated lung dataset
(a) Percentage of ACE2+TMPRSS2+ (double positive - DP) cells across samples with sample
composition. Top: Percentage ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells in each sample, from each level 2 cell type
in which DP cells are found. Bottom: Sample composition. All level 2 cell type annotations where
no DP cells are found are summarized as “Other” for ease of visualization. Samples are ordered
by age with 31-week pre-term births and 39-week full-term births both set to age 0. (b) Zoom in
on fetal and pediatric samples of plot (a). All level 2 cell types without DP cells in fetal and
pediatric samples are labeled as “Other”. Samples are ordered and labeled by age. Fetal samples
are partitioned into first and second trimester (TM) and pediatric samples are divided into 31-week
pre-term births, 39-week full term births, 3 month, 3 year, and 10 year old children.
Extended Data Figure 4. ACE2 expression across tissues and celltypes.
Shown are fractions of ACE2 expressing cells (dot size) and mean ACE2 expression level in
expressing cells (dot color) across datasets (rows) and cell types (columns).
Extended Data Figure 5. ACE2, TMPRSS2, CTSL Immunofluorescence and RNA profiling
(a) Immunostaining in human adult lung alveoli. TMPRSS2 (red), HTII-280 (green) and AGER
(white). Blue shows DAPI in nuclei. (b) Mean expression (y axis, FPKM, from bulk RNA-seq)
of ACE2, CTSL, TMPRSS2 in sorted cells from 3 different human explant donors using the
following markers: large and small airway basal cells (NGFR+), AT2 cells (HT-II 280+) and
alveolar organoids (HT-II 280+). (c) Human adult lung: alveolar section stained with ACE2
(green) and Pro-SFTPC (red) antibodies and DAPI (blue). (d) Lung from infant donor: alveolar
section stained with ACE2 (green) and Pro-SFTPC (red) antibodies and DAPI (blue). (e)
Expression in the submucosal gland. Mean expression (color) and proportion of expressing cells
(dot size) of ACE2, TMPRSS2 and CTSL in key cell types (rows), from scRNA-seq of human large
airway submucosal glands.
Extended Data Figure 6. Age, sex, and smoking status associations with expression of ACE2,
TMPRSS2, and CTSL across level 2 cell type annotations.
Effect size (y axis) of association as log fold changes (sex, smoking status) and slope of log
expression with age. Bars that are colored in indicate associations with an FDR-corrected p-value
of < 0.05 where the pseudo-bulk analysis shows a consistent effect direction. Error bars represent
model uncertainties.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Figure 7. Age, sex, and smoking status associations with expression of ACE2,
TMPRSS2, and CTSL across level 3 cell type annotations.
Effect size (y axis) of the association as log fold changes (sex, smoking status) and slope of log
expression with age. Bars that are colored in indicate associations with an FDR-corrected p-value
of < 0.05 where the pseudo-bulk analysis shows a consistent effect direction. Error bars represent
model uncertainties.
Extended Data Figure 8. Age and sex associations with expression of ACE2, TMPRSS2, and
CTSL in level 3 and level 2 cell type annotations on the full, non-fetal, lung data
Effect size (y axis) of the association as log fold changes (sex, smoking status) and slope of log
expression with age. Bars that are colored in indicate associations with an FDR-corrected p-value
of < 0.05 where the pseudo-bulk analysis shows a consistent effect direction. Error bars represent
model uncertainties. (a) Level 3 and (b) Level 2 cell type annotations.
Extended Data Figure 9. Chromatin accessibility at the ACE2, TMPRSS and CTSL loci
across lung cells in early life
(a) Schematic: single-cell chromatin accessibility by transposome hypersensitive sites sequencing
(THS-Seq) from human pediatric samples (full gestation, no known lung disease) collected at day
1 of life, 14 months, 3 years, and 9 years (n=1 at each time point). (b) Accessibility (dot color log
normalized gene activity scores), and % of cells with accessible loci (dot size) for the ACE2,
TMPRSS, and CTSL loci (columns) across different cell types (rows) in scTHS-Seq with all time
points aggregated. (c) Accessibility (dot color log normalized gene activity scores), and % of cells
with accessible loci (dot size) of ACE2, TMPRSS and CTSL in AT1--AT2 cells in scTHS-Seq at
day 1 of life, 14 months, 3 years, and 9 years (rows). (d) Number of ACE2+CTSL+ and
ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells per time point.
Extended Data Fig. 10. Tissue programs for dual positive cells
(a) Selected tissue program genes. Node: gene; Edge: program membership. Genes are selected
heuristically for visualization, derived from the positive feature importance values of a random
forest classifier without nUMI distribution matching (Methods).). (b) Stratified subsampling to
match nUMI distributions. (c,d) Enrichment (-log10(adj P-value), x axis) of GO Biological
Process (c) and KEGG pathway (d) gene sets (y axis) in the full tissue programs without nUMI
distribution matching.
Extended Data Fig. 11. Cell programs for dual positive cells
(a,b) Top 12 genes from each cell program recovered for different lung (a) or gut (b) epithelial
cell-type (nodes, colors). Colored concentric circles: overlap with a gene in the top 250 significant
genes in other cell types. ACE2 and TMPRSS2 are included even if not among the top 12. (c)
Comparison of signature scores of cell programs between DP and DN cells for each cell type
stratified by gene complexity bin. Cells were partitioned into 10 gene complexity bins for every
cell type. (d,e) IL6 and its receptor’s expression in specific cell types in lung and heart. (d)
Significance (dot size) and fold change (dot color) of differential expression between DP and DN
cells within different types (rows) for IL6 and its receptors IL6R and IL6ST (columns) across
tissues. (e) Top: Significance (dot size) and fold change (dot color) of differential expression
between DP and DN cells within different cell types in the heart (rows)for IL6 and its receptors
IL6R and IL6ST (columns). Bottom: Significance (dot size) and effect size (dot color) from a mixed

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

effects model of co-expression of IL6, IL6R, or IL6ST (columns) coexpression with ACE2. (f)
Distribution of number of counts in peaks (y axis) in ACE2+ epithelial cells (having at least 1
fragment in the ACE2 gene locus) and ACE2- cells.
Extended Data Figure 12. Co-expression of ACE2 and IL6,IL6R,IL6ST.
Co-expression of ACE2 and IL6,IL6R,IL6ST in select single-cell datasets. P-values and
significance (FDR 10%) derived from the logistic mixed-effects model.
Extended Data Figure 13. Expression of Ace2, Tmprss2 and Ctsl in mouse placenta.
UMAP embedding (as in Fig. 5k) of scRNA-seq profiles of placenta cells collected at E.14.5 (top)
or along a time course (bottom), colored by expression level ofAce2, Tmprss2, and Ctsl.
Extended Data Figure 14. Additional analyses to identify other proteases that may have a
role in infection.
(a) Multiple proteases are co-expressed with ACE2 in another human lung scRNA-seq
(“aggregated lung”). Scatter plot of significance (y axis, -log10(adjusted p value)) and effect size
(x axis) of co-expression of each protease gene (dot) with ACE within each indicated epithelial
cell type (color). Dashed line: significance threshold. TMPRSS2 and PCSKs that significantly coexpressed with ACE2 are marked. (b) ACE2-protease co-expression with PCSKs, TMPRSS2 and
CTSL across lung cell types (“aggregated lung”). Significance (dot size, -log10(adjusted p value))
and effect size (color) for co-expression of ACE2 with selected proteases (columns) across cell
types (rows). (c-d) Predicted cleavage sites in the SARS-CoV-2 S-protein S1/S2 region. (c)
Multiple amino acid sequence alignment of SARS-CoV-2 S-protein S1/S2 region with orthologous
sequences from other betacoronaviruses (top) and polybasic cleavage sites of other human
pathogenic viruses (bottom). (d) Sequence logo plot showing cleavage site preference derived
from MEROPS database for PCSK1, PCSK2, FURIN, PCSK4, PCSK5, PCSK6 and PCSK7. (e)
Protease cleavage sites (triangles) predicted by ProP and PROSPERous in the SARS-CoV-2 spike
protein. Top: Full-length SARS-CoV-2 S-protein sequence schematic with predicted functional
protein domains and motifs. Numbers: amino acid residues after which cleavage occurs; SP: signal
peptide; NTD: N-terminal domain; RBD: Receptor-binding domain; FP: Fusion peptide; FP1/2:
Fusion peptide 1/2; HR1: Heptad repeat 1; CH: connecting helix; HR2: Heptad repeat 2; TM:
Transmembrane domain. (f,g) Multiple proteases are expressed across lung cell types (“aggregated
lung”). (f) Distribution of expression (y axis) for ACE2, PCSKs and TMPRSS2 across lung cell
types (x axis). White dot: median expression. (g) Proportion of cells (y axis) expressing ACE2,
PCSK family or TMPRSS2 across lung cell types (x axis), ordered by compartment. (h)
ACE2+PCSK+ dual positive cells across lung cell types. Fraction (y axis) of different ACE2+PCSK+
or ACE2+TMPRSS2+ dual positive cells across lung cell types, ordered by compartment (x axis).
Dots: different individuals, line: median. (i,j) ACE2+PCSK+ co-expression across human tissues
(collection of published scRNA seq datasets). (i) Percent (y axis) of different ACE2+PCSK+ or
ACE2+TMPRSS2+ dual positive cells across human tissues (x axis). Dots: different individuals,
line: median. (j) ACE2 co-expression with PCSKs or TMPRSS2 across human tissues. Significance
(dot size) and effect size (dot color) of co-expression. (k) Fraction of ACE2+TMPRSS2+PCSK+
cells across lung cell types (“Regev/Rajagopal dataset”). Dots: individuals, line: median.
Extended Data Figure 15. ACE2-protease co-expression of the top 20 most significantly coexpressed human proteases in key lung epithelial cell types.

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Significance (dot size) and effect size (dot color) of co-expression of each protease (columns) with
ACE2 in each cell subset (rows).
Extended Data Figure 16. Variation in fraction of ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells
The normalized fraction of ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells in 282 lung and nasal samples from 164 donors,
subdivided by cell type. Normalization was performed by dividing the fraction by the median total
counts per cell in the cell type of the sample. Samples are grouped by dataset and ordered by donor
age within each dataset (blue bars at the top). Datasets are ordered by mean age of donors. White
patches indicate the cell type annotation was not observed in the sample. This occurs either due to
coarseness of annotation, or absence of cell type in the sample.
REFERENCES
1. Xu, Z. et al. Pathological findings of COVID-19 associated with acute respiratory
distress syndrome. Lancet Respir Med 8, 420–422 (2020).
2. Huang, C. et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in
Wuhan, China. Lancet 395, 497–506 (2020).
3. Fan, Z. et al. Clinical Features of COVID-19 Related Liver Damage. medRxiv (2020).
4. Guan, W.-J. et al. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China. N.
Engl. J. Med. (2020) doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2002032.
5. Zheng, Y.-Y., Ma, Y.-T., Zhang, J.-Y. & Xie, X. COVID-19 and the cardiovascular
system. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. (2020) doi:10.1038/s41569-020-0360-5.
6. Ren, L.-L. et al. Identification of a novel coronavirus causing severe pneumonia in
human: a descriptive study. Chin. Med. J. (2020) doi:10.1097/CM9.0000000000000722.
7. Wang, C., Horby, P. W., Hayden, F. G. & Gao, G. F. A novel coronavirus outbreak of
global health concern. The Lancet vol. 395 470–473 (2020).
8. Rothan, H. A. & Byrareddy, S. N. The epidemiology and pathogenesis of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) outbreak. J. Autoimmun. 102433 (2020).
9. Cheng, Y. et al. Kidney impairment is associated with in-hospital death of COVID-19

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

patients. Nephrology (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.02.18.20023242.
10.

Hui, H. et al. Clinical and radiographic features of cardiac injury in patients with

2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia. Cardiovascular Medicine (2020)
doi:10.1101/2020.02.24.20027052.
11.

Xu, Y. et al. Characteristics of pediatric SARS-CoV-2 infection and potential

evidence for persistent fecal viral shedding. Nature Medicine (2020) doi:10.1038/s41591020-0817-4.
12.

CDC. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). Centers for Disease Control and

Prevention https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/clinical-guidancemanagement-patients.html (2020).
13.

Wang, W. et al. Detection of SARS-CoV-2 in Different Types of Clinical

Specimens. JAMA (2020) doi:10.1001/jama.2020.3786.
14.

Shen, Q., Xiao, X., Aierken, A., Liao, M. & Hua, J. The ACE2 Expression in

Sertoli cells and Germ cells may cause male reproductive disorder after SARS-CoV-2
Infection. (2020) doi:10.31219/osf.io/fs5hd.
15.

Cai, X. An Insight of comparison between COVID-19 (2019-nCoV disease) and

SARS in pathology and pathogenesis. Open Science Framework (2020)
doi:10.31219/osf.io/hw34x.
16.

Dong, L. et al. Possible Vertical Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 From an Infected

Mother to Her Newborn. JAMA (2020) doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4621.
17.

Chen, H. et al. Clinical characteristics and intrauterine vertical transmission

potential of COVID-19 infection in nine pregnant women: a retrospective review of medical
records. Lancet 395, 809–815 (2020).

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

18.

Zeng, L. et al. Neonatal Early-Onset Infection With SARS-CoV-2 in 33 Neonates

Born to Mothers With COVID-19 in Wuhan, China. JAMA Pediatr. (2020)
doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2020.0878.
19.

Zeng, H. et al. Antibodies in Infants Born to Mothers With COVID-19

Pneumonia. JAMA (2020) doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4861.
20.

Schwartz, D. A. An Analysis of 38 Pregnant Women with COVID-19, Their

Newborn Infants, and Maternal-Fetal Transmission of SARS-CoV-2: Maternal Coronavirus
Infections and Pregnancy Outcomes. Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med. (2020)
doi:10.5858/arpa.2020-0901-SA.
21.

Chen, Y. et al. Infants Born to Mothers With a New Coronavirus (COVID-19).

Frontiers in Pediatrics 8, 104 (2020).
22.

Yang Li et al. Lack of Vertical Transmission of Severe Acute Respiratory

Syndrome Coronavirus 2, China. Emerging Infectious Disease journal 26, (2020).
23.

Li, R. et al. Substantial undocumented infection facilitates the rapid dissemination

of novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV2). Science (2020) doi:10.1126/science.abb3221.
24.

Riou, J., Hauser, A., Counotte, M. J. & Althaus, C. L. Adjusted age-specific case

fatality ratio during the COVID-19 epidemic in Hubei, China, January and February 2020.
Epidemiology (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.03.04.20031104.
25.

Wu, J. T. et al. Estimating clinical severity of COVID-19 from the transmission

dynamics in Wuhan, China. Nat. Med. (2020) doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0822-7.
26.

Nick Wilson, Amanda Kvalsvig, Lucy Telfar Barnard & Michael G. Baker. Case-

Fatality Risk Estimates for COVID-19 Calculated by Using a Lag Time for Fatality.
Emerging Infectious Disease journal 26, (2020).

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

27.

Kenji Mizumoto & Gerardo Chowell. Estimating Risk for Death from 2019 Novel

Coronavirus Disease, China, January–February 2020. Emerging Infectious Disease journal
26, (2020).
28.

Baud, D. et al. Real estimates of mortality following COVID-19 infection. Lancet

Infect. Dis. (2020) doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30195-X.
29.

Wang, C. et al. Evolving Epidemiology and Impact of Non-pharmaceutical

Interventions on the Outbreak of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in Wuhan, China. Epidemiology
(2020) doi:10.1101/2020.03.03.20030593.
30.

del Rio, C. & Malani, P. N. COVID-19—New Insights on a Rapidly Changing

Epidemic. JAMA (2020) doi:10.1001/jama.2020.3072.
31.

Lu, X. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Children. N. Engl. J. Med. (2020)

doi:10.1056/NEJMc2005073.
32.

Vardavas, C. I. & Nikitara, K. COVID-19 and smoking: A systematic review of

the evidence. Tob. Induc. Dis. 18, 20 (2020).
33.

Inciardi, R. M. et al. Cardiac Involvement in a Patient With Coronavirus Disease

2019 (COVID-19). JAMA Cardiol (2020) doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2020.1096.
34.

Bonow, R. O., Fonarow, G. C., O’Gara, P. T. & Yancy, C. W. Association of

Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) With Myocardial Injury and Mortality. JAMA
Cardiol (2020) doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2020.1105.
35.

Fehr, A. R. & Perlman, S. Coronaviruses: an overview of their replication and

pathogenesis. Methods Mol. Biol. 1282, 1–23 (2015).
36.

Wrapp, D. et al. Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion

conformation. Science (2020) doi:10.1126/science.abb2507.

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

37.

Hoffmann, M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2

and Is Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. Cell 0, (2020).
38.

Wan, Y., Shang, J., Graham, R., Baric, R. S. & Li, F. Receptor recognition by

novel coronavirus from Wuhan: An analysis based on decade-long structural studies of
SARS. J. Virol. (2020) doi:10.1128/JVI.00127-20.
39.

Bader, M. Tissue renin-angiotensin-aldosterone systems: Targets for

pharmacological therapy. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 50, 439–465 (2010).
40.

Li, W. et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 is a functional receptor for the

SARS coronavirus. Nature 426, 450–454 (2003).
41.

Walls, A. C. et al. Structure, Function, and Antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2

Spike Glycoprotein. Cell (2020) doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.058.
42.

Wang, K. et al. SARS-CoV-2 invades host cells via a novel route: CD147-spike

protein. bioRxiv 2020.03.14.988345 (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.03.14.988345.
43.

Millet, J. K. & Whittaker, G. R. Host cell proteases: Critical determinants of

coronavirus tropism and pathogenesis. Virus Res. 202, 120–134 (2015).
44.

Matsuyama, S. et al. Enhanced isolation of SARS-CoV-2 by TMPRSS2-

expressing cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. (2020) doi:10.1073/pnas.2002589117.
45.

Sungnak, W., Huang, N., Bécavin, C., Berg, M. & HCA Lung Biological

Network. SARS-CoV-2 Entry Genes Are Most Highly Expressed in Nasal Goblet and
Ciliated Cells within Human Airways. arXiv [q-bio.CB] (2020).
46.

Ziegler, C. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Receptor ACE2 is an Interferon-Stimulated Gene

in Human Airway Epithelial Cells and Is Enriched in Specific Cell Subsets Across Tissues.
(2020).

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

47.

Lukassen, S. et al. SARS-CoV-2 receptor ACE2 and TMPRSS2 are

predominantly expressed in a transient secretory cell type in subsegmental bronchial
branches. bioRxiv 2020.03.13.991455 (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.03.13.991455.
48.

Qi, F., Qian, S., Zhang, S. & Zhang, Z. Single cell RNA sequencing of 13 human

tissues identify cell types and receptors of human coronaviruses. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. (2020) doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.03.044.
49.

Wang, J. et al. ACE2 expression by colonic epithelial cells is associated with viral

infection, immunity and energy metabolism. medRxiv (2020).
50.

Huang, I.-C. et al. SARS coronavirus, but not human coronavirus NL63, utilizes

cathepsin L to infect ACE2-expressing cells. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 3198–3203 (2006).
51.

Chai, X. et al. Specific ACE2 Expression in Cholangiocytes May Cause Liver

Damage After 2019-nCoV Infection. bioRxiv 2020.02.03.931766 (2020)
doi:10.1101/2020.02.03.931766.
52.

Gallagher, P. E., Ferrario, C. M. & Tallant, E. A. Regulation of ACE2 in cardiac

myocytes and fibroblasts. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 295, H2373–9 (2008).
53.

Smillie, C. S. et al. Intra- and Inter-cellular Rewiring of the Human Colon during

Ulcerative Colitis. Cell 178, 714–730.e22 (2019).
54.

Emery, B. et al. Myelin gene regulatory factor is a critical transcriptional

regulator required for CNS myelination. Cell 138, 172–185 (2009).
55.

Zhou, F. et al. Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients

with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet (2020)
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30566-3.
56.

Rabin, R. C. Lost Sense of Smell May Be Peculiar Clue to Coronavirus Infection.

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

The New York Times (2020).
57.

Xia, J., Tong, J., Liu, M., Shen, Y. & Guo, D. Evaluation of coronavirus in tears

and conjunctival secretions of patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection. J. Med. Virol. (2020)
doi:10.1002/jmv.25725.
58.

Tucker, N. R. et al. Myocyte Specific Upregulation of ACE2 in Cardiovascular

Disease: Implications for SARS-CoV-2 mediated myocarditis. medRxiv
2020.04.09.20059204 (2020).
59.

Henry, B. M. COVID-19, ECMO, and lymphopenia: a word of caution. Lancet

Respir Med (2020) doi:10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30119-3.
60.

Tan, L. et al. Lymphopenia predicts disease severity of COVID-19: a descriptive

and predictive study. Signal Transduct Target Ther 5, 33 (2020).
61.

Chen, Y. et al. The Novel Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2

(SARS-CoV-2) Directly Decimates Human Spleens and Lymph Nodes. Infectious Diseases
(except HIV/AIDS) (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.03.27.20045427.
62.

Cai, H. Sex difference and smoking predisposition in patients with COVID-19.

Lancet Respir Med (2020) doi:10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30117-X.
63.

Vieira Braga, F. A. et al. A cellular census of human lungs identifies novel cell

states in health and in asthma. Nat. Med. 25, 1153–1163 (2019).
64.

Reyfman, P. A. et al. Single-Cell Transcriptomic Analysis of Human Lung

Provides Insights into the Pathobiology of Pulmonary Fibrosis. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care
Med. 199, 1517–1536 (2019).
65.

Morse, C. et al. Proliferating SPP1/MERTK-expressing macrophages in

idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Eur. Respir. J. 54, (2019).

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

66.

Madissoon, E. et al. scRNA-seq assessment of the human lung, spleen, and

esophagus tissue stability after cold preservation. Genome Biol. 21, 1 (2019).
67.

Ordovas-Montanes, J. et al. Allergic inflammatory memory in human respiratory

epithelial progenitor cells. Nature 560, 649–654 (2018).
68.

Miller, A. J. et al. In Vitro and In Vivo Development of the Human Airway at

Single-Cell Resolution. Dev. Cell (2020) doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2020.01.033.
69.

Deprez, M. et al. A single-cell atlas of the human healthy airways. bioRxiv

2019.12.21.884759 (2019) doi:10.1101/2019.12.21.884759.
70.

Adams, T. S. et al. Single Cell RNA-seq reveals ectopic and aberrant lung

resident cell populations in Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis. bioRxiv 759902 (2019)
doi:10.1101/759902.
71.

Travaglini, K. J. et al. A molecular cell atlas of the human lung from single cell

RNA sequencing. bioRxiv 742320 (2020) doi:10.1101/742320.
72.

Habermann, A. C. et al. Single-cell RNA-sequencing reveals profibrotic roles of

distinct epithelial and mesenchymal lineages in pulmonary fibrosis. bioRxiv 753806 (2019)
doi:10.1101/753806.
73.

Goldfarbmuren, K. C. et al. Dissecting the cellular specificity of smoking effects

and reconstructing lineages in the human airway epithelium. bioRxiv 612747 (2019)
doi:10.1101/612747.
74.

Zimmermann, P. & Curtis, N. Coronavirus Infections in Children Including

COVID-19. The Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal 1 (2020)
doi:10.1097/inf.0000000000002660.
75.

Sos, B. C. et al. Characterization of chromatin accessibility with a transposome

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

hypersensitive sites sequencing (THS-seq) assay. Genome Biol. 17, 20 (2016).
76.

Vento-Tormo, R. et al. Single-cell reconstruction of the early maternal-fetal

interface in humans. Nature 563, 347–353 (2018).
77.

Suryawanshi, H. et al. A single-cell survey of the human first-trimester placenta

and decidua. Sci Adv 4, eaau4788 (2018).
78.

Tsang, J. C. H. et al. Integrative single-cell and cell-free plasma RNA

transcriptomics elucidates placental cellular dynamics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 114,
E7786–E7795 (2017).
79.

Chan, C.-M. et al. Carcinoembryonic Antigen-Related Cell Adhesion Molecule 5

Is an Important Surface Attachment Factor That Facilitates Entry of Middle East Respiratory
Syndrome Coronavirus. J. Virol. 90, 9114–9127 (2016).
80.

Wahl, S. M. et al. Secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor (SLPI) in mucosal fluids

inhibits HIV-I. Oral Dis. 3 Suppl 1, S64–9 (1997).
81.

Turula, H. & Wobus, C. E. The Role of the Polymeric Immunoglobulin Receptor

and Secretory Immunoglobulins during Mucosal Infection and Immunity. Viruses 10,
(2018).
82.

Burkhardt, A. M. et al. CXCL17 is a mucosal chemokine elevated in idiopathic

pulmonary fibrosis that exhibits broad antimicrobial activity. J. Immunol. 188, 6399–6406
(2012).
83.

Debbabi, H. et al. Primary type II alveolar epithelial cells present microbial

antigens to antigen-specific CD4+ T cells. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol. 289,
L274–9 (2005).
84.

Yue, Y. et al. SARS-Coronavirus Open Reading Frame-3a drives multimodal

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

necrotic cell death. Cell Death Dis. 9, 904 (2018).
85.

Burkard, C. et al. Coronavirus cell entry occurs through the endo-/lysosomal

pathway in a proteolysis-dependent manner. PLoS Pathog. 10, e1004502 (2014).
86.

Liao, Y.-C. et al. IL-19 induces production of IL-6 and TNF-alpha and results in

cell apoptosis through TNF-alpha. J. Immunol. 169, 4288–4297 (2002).
87.

Starner, T. D., Barker, C. K., Jia, H. P., Kang, Y. & McCray, P. B., Jr. CCL20 is

an inducible product of human airway epithelia with innate immune properties. Am. J.
Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 29, 627–633 (2003).
88.

Wishart, D. S. et al. DrugBank 5.0: a major update to the DrugBank database for

2018. Nucleic Acids Res. 46, D1074–D1082 (2018).
89.

Gordon, D. E. et al. A SARS-CoV-2-Human Protein-Protein Interaction Map

Reveals Drug Targets and Potential Drug-Repurposing. bioRxiv 2020.03.22.002386 (2020)
doi:10.1101/2020.03.22.002386.
90.

Luan, H. H. et al. GDF15 Is an Inflammation-Induced Central Mediator of Tissue

Tolerance. Cell 178, 1231–1244.e11 (2019).
91.

Dhar, P. & McAuley, J. The Role of the Cell Surface Mucin MUC1 as a Barrier to

Infection and Regulator of Inflammation. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 9, 117 (2019).
92.

Herold, T., III et al. Level of IL-6 predicts respiratory failure in hospitalized

symptomatic COVID-19 patients. Infectious Diseases (except HIV/AIDS) (2020)
doi:10.1101/2020.04.01.20047381.
93.

Schep, A. N., Wu, B., Buenrostro, J. D. & Greenleaf, W. J. chromVAR: inferring

transcription-factor-associated accessibility from single-cell epigenomic data. Nat. Methods
14, 975–978 (2017).

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

94.

Pedersen, K. B., Chodavarapu, H. & Lazartigues, E. Forkhead Box Transcription

Factors of the FOXA Class Are Required for Basal Transcription of Angiotensin-Converting
Enzyme 2. J Endocr Soc 1, 370–384 (2017).
95.

Raredon, M. S. B. et al. Single-cell connectomic analysis of adult mammalian

lungs. Sci Adv 5, eaaw3851 (2019).
96.

Efremova, M., Vento-Tormo, M., Teichmann, S. A. & Vento-Tormo, R.

CellPhoneDB: inferring cell-cell communication from combined expression of multi-subunit
ligand-receptor complexes. Nat. Protoc. (2020) doi:10.1038/s41596-020-0292-x.
97.

Bruce, A. G., Hoggatt, I. H. & Rose, T. M. Oncostatin M is a differentiation

factor for myeloid leukemia cells. J. Immunol. 149, 1271–1275 (1992).
98.

Li, W. et al. Efficient replication of severe acute respiratory syndrome

coronavirus in mouse cells is limited by murine angiotensin-converting enzyme 2. J. Virol.
78, 11429–11433 (2004).
99.

Montoro, D. T. et al. A revised airway epithelial hierarchy includes CFTR-

expressing ionocytes. Nature 560, 319–324 (2018).
100.

The Mouse in Biomedical Research. (Elsevier Science, 2006).

101.

Gebel, S. et al. The transcriptome of Nrf2-/- mice provides evidence for impaired

cell cycle progression in the development of cigarette smoke-induced emphysematous
changes. Toxicol. Sci. 115, 238–252 (2010).
102.

Pérez-Silva, J. G., Español, Y., Velasco, G. & Quesada, V. The Degradome

database: expanding roles of mammalian proteases in life and disease. Nucleic Acids Res.
44, D351–5 (2016).
103.

Izaguirre, G. The Proteolytic Regulation of Virus Cell Entry by Furin and Other

46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Proprotein Convertases. Viruses 11, (2019).
104.

Braun, E. & Sauter, D. Furin-mediated protein processing in infectious diseases

and cancer. Clin Transl Immunol 8, 9298 (2019).
105.

Coutard, B. et al. The spike glycoprotein of the new coronavirus 2019-nCoV

contains a furin-like cleavage site absent in CoV of the same clade. Antiviral Res. 176,
104742 (2020).
106.

Jaimes, J. A., André, N. M., Millet, J. K. & Whittaker, G. R. Structural modeling

of 2019-novel coronavirus (nCoV) spike protein reveals a proteolytically-sensitive
activation loop as a distinguishing feature compared to SARS-CoV and related SARS-like
coronaviruses. bioRxiv 2020.02.10.942185 (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.02.10.942185.
107.

Seidah, N. G. & Prat, A. The biology and therapeutic targeting of the proprotein

convertases. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 11, 367–383 (2012).
108.

Duckert, P., Brunak, S. & Blom, N. Prediction of proprotein convertase cleavage

sites. Protein Eng. Des. Sel. 17, 107–112 (2004).
109.

Song, J. et al. PROSPERous: high-throughput prediction of substrate cleavage

sites for 90 proteases with improved accuracy. Bioinformatics 34, 684–687 (2018).
110.

Millet, J. K. & Whittaker, G. R. Physiological and molecular triggers for SARS-

CoV membrane fusion and entry into host cells. Virology 517, 3–8 (2018).
111.

Glowacka, I. et al. Evidence that TMPRSS2 activates the severe acute respiratory

syndrome coronavirus spike protein for membrane fusion and reduces viral control by the
humoral immune response. J. Virol. 85, 4122–4134 (2011).
112.

Lukassen, S. et al. SARS-CoV-2 receptor ACE2 and TMPRSS2 are primarily

expressed in bronchial transient secretory cells. EMBO J. (2020)

47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

doi:10.15252/embj.20105114.
113.

Hamming, I. et al. Tissue distribution of ACE2 protein, the functional receptor for

SARS coronavirus. A first step in understanding SARS pathogenesis. J. Pathol. 203, 631–
637 (2004).
114.

Zhao, Y. et al. Single-cell RNA expression profiling of ACE2, the putative

receptor of Wuhan 2019-nCov. bioRxiv 2020.01.26.919985 (2020)
doi:10.1101/2020.01.26.919985.
115.

Venkatakrishnan, A. J. et al. Knowledge synthesis from 100 million biomedical

documents augments the deep expression profiling of coronavirus receptors.
doi:10.1101/2020.03.24.005702.
116.

Mao, L. et al. Neurological Manifestations of Hospitalized Patients with COVID-

19 in Wuhan, China: A Retrospective Case Series Study. Lancet (2020)
doi:10.2139/ssrn.3544840.
117.

Poyiadji, N. et al. COVID-19–associated Acute Hemorrhagic Necrotizing

Encephalopathy: CT and MRI Features. Radiology 201187 (2020)
doi:10.1148/radiol.2020201187.
118.

Helms, J. et al. Neurologic Features in Severe SARS-CoV-2 Infection. N. Engl. J.

Med. (2020) doi:10.1056/NEJMc2008597.
119.

Morishima, T. et al. Encephalitis and encephalopathy associated with an influenza

epidemic in Japan. Clin. Infect. Dis. 35, 512–517 (2002).
120.

Okabe, N., Yamashita, K., Taniguchi, K. & Inouye, S. Influenza surveillance

system of Japan and acute encephalitis and encephalopathy in the influenza season. Pediatr.
Int. 42, 187–191 (2000).

48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

121.

McGavern, D. B. & Kang, S. S. Illuminating viral infections in the nervous

system. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11, 318–329 (2011).
122.

Desforges, M., Le Coupanec, A., Stodola, J. K., Meessen-Pinard, M. & Talbot, P.

J. Human coronaviruses: viral and cellular factors involved in neuroinvasiveness and
neuropathogenesis. Virus Res. 194, 145–158 (2014).
123.

Li, Y., Bai, W. & Hashikawa, T. The neuroinvasive potential of SARS-CoV2 may

be at least partially responsible for the respiratory failure of COVID-19 patients. Journal of
Medical Virology (2020) doi:10.1002/jmv.25728.
124.

Bohmwald, K., Gálvez, N. M. S., Ríos, M. & Kalergis, A. M. Neurologic

Alterations Due to Respiratory Virus Infections. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 12, 386 (2018).
125.

Xu, J. et al. Detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus in the

brain: potential role of the chemokine mig in pathogenesis. Clin. Infect. Dis. 41, 1089–1096
(2005).
126.

Kawada, J.-I. et al. Systemic cytokine responses in patients with influenza-

associated encephalopathy. J. Infect. Dis. 188, 690–698 (2003).
127.

Netland, J., Meyerholz, D. K., Moore, S., Cassell, M. & Perlman, S. Severe acute

respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection causes neuronal death in the absence of
encephalitis in mice transgenic for human ACE2. J. Virol. 82, 7264–7275 (2008).
128.

Brann, D. H., Tsukahara, T., Weinreb, C., Logan, D. W. & Datta, S. R. Non-

neural expression of SARS-CoV-2 entry genes in the olfactory epithelium suggests
mechanisms underlying anosmia in COVID-19 patients. bioRxiv (2020)
doi:10.1101/2020.03.25.009084.
129.

Forrester, J. V., McMenamin, P. G. & Dando, S. J. CNS infection and immune

49

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

privilege. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 655–671 (2018).
130.

Matsuda, K. et al. The vagus nerve is one route of transneural invasion for

intranasally inoculated influenza a virus in mice. Vet. Pathol. 41, 101–107 (2004).
131.

Gesser, R. M. & Koo, S. C. Oral inoculation with herpes simplex virus type 1

infects enteric neuron and mucosal nerve fibers within the gastrointestinal tract in mice. J.
Virol. 70, 4097–4102 (1996).
132.

Hamid, S. H. M. et al. Seizures and Encephalitis in Myelin Oligodendrocyte

Glycoprotein IgG Disease vs Aquaporin 4 IgG Disease. JAMA Neurol. 75, 65–71 (2018).
133.

Wang, L. et al. Encephalitis is an important clinical component of myelin

oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody associated demyelination: a single-center cohort
study in Shanghai, China. Eur. J. Neurol. 26, 168–174 (2019).
134.

Kakalacheva, K. et al. Infectious Mononucleosis Triggers Generation of IgG

Auto-Antibodies against Native Myelin Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein. Viruses 8, (2016).
135.

Heink, S. et al. Trans-presentation of IL-6 by dendritic cells is required for the

priming of pathogenic T17 cells. Nat. Immunol. 18, 74–85 (2017).
136.

Chastain, E. M. L. & Miller, S. D. Molecular mimicry as an inducing trigger for

CNS autoimmune demyelinating disease. Immunol. Rev. 245, 227–238 (2012).
137.

Wagner, C. A., Roqué, P. J., Mileur, T. R., Liggitt, D. & Goverman, J. M.

Myelin-specific CD8 T cells exacerbate brain inflammation in CNS autoimmunity. Journal
of Clinical Investigation vol. 130 203–213 (2019).
138.

Dos Santos, T. et al. Zika Virus and the Guillain-Barré Syndrome - Case Series

from Seven Countries. N. Engl. J. Med. 375, 1598–1601 (2016).
139.

Yuki, N. & Hartung, H.-P. Guillain-Barré syndrome. N. Engl. J. Med. 366, 2294–

50

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

2304 (2012).
140.

Bernard, C. C. A., Johns, T. G., de Rosbo, N. K. & Ichikawa, M. A peptide from

myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein that induces demyelinating encephalomyelitis
resembling multiple sclerosis. Journal of Neuroimmunology vol. 54 153 (1994).
141.

Berger, T. et al. Antimyelin antibodies as a predictor of clinically definite

multiple sclerosis after a first demyelinating event. N. Engl. J. Med. 349, 139–145 (2003).
142.

Egg, R., Reindl, M., Deisenhammer, F., Linington, C. & Berger, T. Anti-MOG

and anti-MBP antibody subclasses in multiple sclerosis. Mult. Scler. 7, 285–289 (2001).
143.

Duc, D. et al. Disrupting Myelin-Specific Th17 Cell Gut Homing Confers

Protection in an Adoptive Transfer Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis. Cell Rep.
29, 378–390.e4 (2019).
144.

Toscano, G. et al. Guillain-Barré Syndrome Associated with SARS-CoV-2. N.

Engl. J. Med. (2020) doi:10.1056/NEJMc2009191.
145.

Simon, O. et al. Early Guillain–Barré Syndrome associated with acute dengue

fever. Journal of Clinical Virology vol. 77 29–31 (2016).
146.

Dirlikov, E. et al. Clinical Features of Guillain-Barré Syndrome With vs Without

Zika Virus Infection, Puerto Rico, 2016. JAMA Neurol. 75, 1089–1097 (2018).
147.

Smith, J. C. & Sheltzer, J. M. Cigarette smoke triggers the expansion of a

subpopulation of respiratory epithelial cells that express the SARS-CoV-2 receptor ACE2.
bioRxiv 2020.03.28.013672 (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.03.28.013672.
148.

Imai, Y. et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 protects from severe acute lung

failure. Nature 436, 112–116 (2005).
149.

Wevers, B. A. & van der Hoek, L. Renin-angiotensin system in human

51

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

coronavirus pathogenesis. Future Virol. 5, 145–161 (2010).
150.

Smoking in men vs. women. Our World in Data

https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/comparing-the-share-of-men-and-women-who-aresmoking.
151.

Liao, M. et al. The landscape of lung bronchoalveolar immune cells in COVID-19

revealed by single-cell RNA sequencing. medRxiv (2020).
152.

Tata, A. et al. Myoepithelial Cells of Submucosal Glands Can Function as

Reserve Stem Cells to Regenerate Airways after Injury. Cell Stem Cell 22, 668–683.e6
(2018).
153.

Lynch, T. J. et al. Submucosal Gland Myoepithelial Cells Are Reserve Stem Cells

That Can Regenerate Mouse Tracheal Epithelium. Cell Stem Cell 22, 653–667.e5 (2018).
154.

Funk, C. J. et al. Infection of human alveolar macrophages by human coronavirus

strain 229E. J. Gen. Virol. 93, 494–503 (2012).
155.

Zhou, Y. et al. A single asparagine-linked glycosylation site of the severe acute

respiratory syndrome coronavirus spike glycoprotein facilitates inhibition by mannosebinding lectin through multiple mechanisms. J. Virol. 84, 8753–8764 (2010).
156.

Wang, R., Xiao, H., Guo, R., Li, Y. & Shen, B. The role of C5a in acute lung

injury induced by highly pathogenic viral infections. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 4, e28 (2015).
157.

Gao, T. et al. Highly pathogenic coronavirus N protein aggravates lung injury by

MASP-2-mediated complement over-activation. medRxiv (2020).
158.

Cheng, Z., Brown, L. E. & Wathes, D. C. Bovine Viral Diarrhoea Virus Infection

Disrupts Uterine Interferon Stimulated Gene Regulatory Pathways During Pregnancy
Recognition in Cows. Viruses 12, (2019).

52

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

159.

Coupanec, A. L. et al. Cleavage of a Neuroinvasive Human Respiratory Virus

Spike Glycoprotein by Proprotein Convertases Modulates Neurovirulence and Virus Spread
within the Central Nervous System. PLOS Pathogens vol. 11 e1005261 (2015).
160.

Braun, E. et al. Guanylate-Binding Proteins 2 and 5 Exert Broad Antiviral

Activity by Inhibiting Furin-Mediated Processing of Viral Envelope Proteins. Cell Rep. 27,
2092–2104.e10 (2019).
161.

Barrett, T. et al. NCBI GEO: archive for functional genomics data sets—update.

Nucleic Acids Research vol. 41 D991–D995 (2012).
162.

Zheng, G. X. Y. et al. Massively parallel digital transcriptional profiling of single

cells. Nat. Commun. 8, 236 (2017).
163.

Li, B. et al. Cumulus: a cloud-based data analysis framework for large-scale

single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-seq. bioRxiv 823682 (2019) doi:10.1101/823682.
164.

Korsunsky, I. et al. Fast, sensitive and accurate integration of single-cell data with

Harmony. Nature Methods vol. 16 1289–1296 (2019).
165.

Wolf, F. A., Angerer, P. & Theis, F. J. SCANPY: large-scale single-cell gene

expression data analysis. Genome Biol. 19, 15 (2018).
166.

Seabold, S. & Perktold, J. Statsmodels: Econometric and Statistical Modeling

with Python. Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference (2010)
doi:10.25080/majora-92bf1922-011.
167.

Bates, D., Mächler, M., Bolker, B. & Walker, S. Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects

Models Using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software, Articles 67, 1–48 (2015).
168.

Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive Integration of Single-Cell Data. Cell 177, 1888–

1902.e21 (2019).

53

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

169.

Cusanovich, D. A. et al. Multiplex single cell profiling of chromatin accessibility

by combinatorial cellular indexing. Science 348, 910–914 (2015).
170.

McInnes, L. & Healy, J. UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and

Projection for Dimension Reduction. arXiv [stat.ML] (2018).
171.

Fornes, O. et al. JASPAR 2020: update of the open-access database of

transcription factor binding profiles. Nucleic Acids Res. 48, D87–D92 (2020).
172.

Davis, C. A. et al. The Encyclopedia of DNA elements (ENCODE): data portal

update. Nucleic Acids Res. 46, D794–D801 (2018).
173.

Nagendran, M., Riordan, D. P., Harbury, P. B. & Desai, T. J. Automated cell-type

classification in intact tissues by single-cell molecular profiling. eLife vol. 7 (2018).
174.

Habermann, A. C. et al. Single-cell RNA-sequencing reveals profibrotic roles of

distinct epithelial and mesenchymal lineages in pulmonary fibrosis. Genomics 1888 (2019).
175.

Pedregosa, F. et al. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. J. Mach. Learn.

Res. 12, 2825–2830 (2011).
176.

Breiman, L., Friedman, J., Stone, C. J. & Olshen, R. A. Classification and

regression trees. (CRC press, 1984).
177.

Hagberg, A., Swart, P. & S Chult, D. Exploring network structure, dynamics, and

function using NetworkX.
http://conference.scipy.org/proceedings/SciPy2008/paper_2/full_text.pdf (2008).
178.

Jacomy, M., Venturini, T., Heymann, S. & Bastian, M. ForceAtlas2, a continuous

graph layout algorithm for handy network visualization designed for the Gephi software.
PLoS One 9, e98679 (2014).
179.

Raudvere, U. et al. g:Profiler: a web server for functional enrichment analysis and

54

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

conversions of gene lists (2019 update). Nucleic Acids Research vol. 47 W191–W198
(2019).
180.

Finak, G. et al. MAST: a flexible statistical framework for assessing

transcriptional changes and characterizing heterogeneity in single-cell RNA sequencing
data. Genome Biol. 16, 278 (2015).
181.

Kuleshov, M. V. et al. Enrichr: a comprehensive gene set enrichment analysis

web server 2016 update. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, W90–7 (2016).

AUTHORS AND AFFILIATIONS
Named authors: *contributed equally
name

affiliation

Christoph Muus*

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA 02138

Malte D. Luecken*

Institute of Computational Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany

Gokcen Eraslan*

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Avinash Waghray*

Center for Regenerative Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
Departments of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Pulmonary and Critical
Care Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA

Graham Heimberg*

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Lisa Sikkema*

Institute of Computational Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany

Yoshihiko Kobayashi*

Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical School, Durham, NC 27710, USA

Eeshit Dhaval Vaishnav*

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 02140, USA

Ayshwarya
Subramanian*

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Christopher Smilie*

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Karthik Jagadeesh*

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Elizabeth Thu Duong*

University of California San Diego
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Respiratory Medicine

Evgenij Fiskin*

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

55

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Elena Torlai Triglia*

Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Meshal Ansari*

Comprehensive Pneumology Center (CPC) / Institute of Lung Biology and Disease (ILBD), Helmholtz
Zentrum München, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany; Institute
of Computational Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany

Peiwen Cai*

Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicineat Mount Sinai, New York, NY
10029, USA

Brian Lin*

Center for Regenerative Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital,Boston, MA, USA
Departments of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Pulmonary and Critical
Care Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA

Justin Buchanan*

Center for Epigenomics, University of California-San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA, 92093.
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California-San Diego School of Medicine, La
Jolla, CA, 92093.

Sijia Chen*

Division of Rheumatology, Inflammation, and Immunity, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, USA

Jian Shu*

Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Adam L Haber*

Department of Environmental Health, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Hattie Chung*

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Daniel T Montoro*

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Taylor Adams

Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine

Hananeh Aliee

Institute of Computational Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Member of the German Center for Lung
Research (DZL), Munich, Germany

Samuel J. Allon

Institute for Medical Engineering and Science & Department of Chemistry, MIT; Ragon Institute of MGH,
MIT and Harvard; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

Zaneta Andrusivova

SciLifeLab, Department of Gene Technology, KTH Royal Institute of Technology

Ilias Angelidis

Comprehensive Pneumology Center (CPC) / Institute of Lung Biology and Disease (ILBD), Helmholtz
Zentrum München, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany

Orr Ashenberg

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Kevin Bassler

Department for Genomics & Immunoregulation, LIMES-Institute, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn,
Germany

Christophe Bécavin

Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, IPMC, Sophia-Antipolis, 06560, France

Inbal Benhar

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Joseph Bergenstråhle

SciLifeLab, Department of Gene Technology, KTH Royal Institute of Technology

Ludvig Bergenstråhle

SciLifeLab, Department of Gene Technology, KTH Royal Institute of Technology

Liam Bolt

Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, CB10 1SA, UK

56

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Emelie Braun
Linh T Bui

Division of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska
Institute
Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ

Mark Chaffin

Precision Cardiology Laboratory, The Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA 02142

Evgeny Chichelnitskiy

Institute of Transplant Immunology, Hannover Medical School, MHH, Carl-Neuberg Str. 1, 30625 Hannover,
Germany, phone +40 511 532 9745; fax +40 511 532 8090; German Center for Infectious Diseases DZIF, TTUIICH 07.801

Joshua Chiou

Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093.

Thomas M Conlon

Comprehensive Pneumology Center (CPC) / Institute of Lung Biology and Disease (ILBD), Helmholtz
Zentrum München, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany

Michael S Cuoco

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Marie Deprez

Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, IPMC, Sophia-Antipolis, 06560, France

David S Fischer

Institute of Computational Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany

Astrid Gillich

Department of Biochemistry and Wall Center for Pulmonary Vascular Disease

Joshua Gould
Minzhe Guo
Austin J Gutierrez

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA
Divisions of Pulmonary Biology; Perinatal Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center
Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ

Arun C Habermann

Division of Allergy, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN

Tyler Harvey

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Peng He

Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, CB10 1SA, UK

Xiaomeng Hou

Center for Epigenomics, University of California-San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA, 92093.
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California-San Diego School of Medicine, La
Jolla, CA, 92093.

Lijuan Hu

Division of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska
Institute

Alok Jaiswal

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Peiyong Jiang

Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories,
Hong Kong SAR, China

Theodoros Kapellos

Department for Genomics & Immunoregulation, LIMES-Institute, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn,
Germany

Christin S Kuo

Department of Biochemistry and Wall Center for Pulmonary Vascular Disease

Ludvig Larsson

SciLifeLab, Department of Gene Technology, KTH Royal Institute of Technology

Michael A. Leney-Greene Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA
Kyungtae Lim

Litviňuková

Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 1QN, UK
Cellular Genetics Programme, Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge CB10 1SA, United Kingdom.; Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences, Max Delbrück Center
for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), Berlin, Germany.

57

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Ji Lu

Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories,
Hong Kong SAR, China

Leif S Ludwig

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA Division of
Hematology / Oncology, Boston Children’s Hospital and Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

Wendy Luo

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Henrike Maatz

Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz
Association (MDC), Berlin, Germany.

Elo Madissoon

Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, CB10 1SA, UK

Lira Mamanova

Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, CB10 1SA, UK

Kasidet
Manakongtreecheep

Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA
Center for Cancer Research, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
Center for Immunology and Inflammatory Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA,
USA

Charles-Hugo Marquette

Université Côte d’Azur, CHU de Nice, FHU OncoAge, CNRS, Inserm, IRCAN team 3, Pulmonology
Department, Nice, 06000, France

Ian Mbano

Africa Health Research Institute, Durban, South Africa

Alexi Marie McAdams

Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Boston, MA 02114;

Ross J Metzger

Department of Biochemistry and Wall Center for Pulmonary Vascular Disease

Ahmad N Nabhan

Department of Biochemistry and Wall Center for Pulmonary Vascular Disease

Sarah K. Nyquist

Computational and Systems Biology, CSAIL, Institute for Medical Engineering and Science & Department
of Chemistry, MIT; Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

Lolita Penland

Department of Biochemistry and Wall Center for Pulmonary Vascular Disease

Olivier B Poirion

Center for Epigenomics, University of California-San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA, 92093.
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California-San Diego School of Medicine, La
Jolla, CA, 92093.

Sergio Poli

Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine

CanCan Qi

Dept. of Pediatric Pulmonology and Pediatric Allergology, Beatrix Children’s Hospital, University of
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands; GRIAC Research Institute,
University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands

Rachel Queen

Biosciences Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, International Centre for Life,
Bioscience West Building, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3 BZ, UK

Daniel Reichart

Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.; Department of Cardiology,
University Heart&Vascular Center, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany

Ivan Rosas

Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine

Jonas Schupp

Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine

Rahul Sinha

Department of Biochemistry and Wall Center for Pulmonary Vascular Disease

Rene V Sit

Department of Biochemistry and Wall Center for Pulmonary Vascular Disease

58

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Kamil Slowikowski

Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA
Center for Cancer Research, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
Center for Immunology and Inflammatory Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA,
USA

Michal Slyper

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Neal Smith

Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA
Center for Cancer Research, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
Center for Immunology and Inflammatory Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA,
USA

Alex Sountoulidis

Stockholm University, Department of Molecular Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren Institute.

Maximilian Strunz

Comprehensive Pneumology Center (CPC) / Institute of Lung Biology and Disease (ILBD), Helmholtz
Zentrum München, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany

Dawei Sun

Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 1QN, UK

Carlos Talavera-López

Cellular Genetics Programme, Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge CB10 1SA, United Kingdom.

Peng Tan

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Jessica Tantivit

Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA
Center for Cancer Research, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
Center for Immunology and Inflammatory Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA,
USA

Kyle J Travaglini

Department of Biochemistry and Wall Center for Pulmonary Vascular Disease

Nathan R. Tucker

Precision Cardiology Laboratory, The Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA 02142
Masonic Medical Research Institute, Utica, NY, USA 13501

Katherine Vernon

Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA

Marc H. Wadsworth

Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Department of Chemistry & Koch Institute for Integrative
Cancer Research, MIT; Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

Julia Waldman

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Xiuting Wang

Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicineat Mount Sinai, New York, NY
10029, USA

Wenjun Yan

Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138

William Zhao

Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicineat Mount Sinai, New York, NY
10029, USA

Carly G. K. Ziegler

Harvard-MIT Health Sciences and Technology, Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Koch
Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, MIT; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard; Ragon Institute of
MGH, MIT and Harvard

NHLBI LungMap Consortium author

Gail H. Deutsch

Department of Pathology, Seattle Children’s Hospital, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington

59

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Jennifer Dutra

University of Rochester Biocomputational Center, Research Data Integration & Analytics Group, University
of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York;
Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester,
New York;

Kyle J Gaulton

Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California-San Diego School of Medicine,
La Jolla, CA, 92093.

Jeanne Holden-Wiltse
Heidie L. Huyck

University of Rochester Biocomputational Center, Research Data Integration & Analytics Group, University
of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York;
Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester,
New York;
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New
York

Thomas J. Mariani

Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New
York
Program in Pediatric Molecular and Personalized Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York

Ravi S. Misra

Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New
York

Cory Poole

Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New
York;

Sebastian Preissl

Center for Epigenomics, University of California-San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA, 92093.
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California-San Diego School of Medicine,
La Jolla, CA, 92093.

Gloria S. Pryhuber

Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New
York

Lisa Rogers

Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New
York;

Xin Sun

Department of Pediatrics, University of California-San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92093.
Department of Biological Sciences, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093.

Allen Wang

Center for Epigenomics, University of California-San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA, 92093.
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California-San Diego School of Medicine,
La Jolla, CA, 92093.

Jeffrey A Whitsett

Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OHIO

Yan Xu

Divisions of Pulmonary Biology and Biomedical Informatics; Perinatal Institute, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center; University of Cincinnati College of Medicine

HCA Lung Biological Network author

Jehan Alladina

Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, USA

Nicholas E Banovich

Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ.

Pascal Barbry

Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, IPMC, Sophia-Antipolis, 06560, France

Jennifer E. Beane

Department of Medicine, Section of Computational Biomedicine, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States.

60

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Roby P. Bhattacharyya

Infectious Disease and Microbiome Program, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA
Infectious Diseases Division, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

Katharine E. Black

Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

Alvis Brazma

European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Wellcome
Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SD, UK

Joshua D. Campbell

Division of Computational Biomedicine, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA, USA.

Josalyn L. Cho

Pulmonary, Critical Care and Occupational Medicine, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine,
431 Newton Rd, 529 Eckstein Medical Research Building, Iowa City, IA 52242

Joseph Collin

Biosciences Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, International Centre for Life,
Bioscience West Building, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3 BZ, UK

Christian Conrad

Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin, HumboldtUniversität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany
Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Center for Digital Health, Anna-Louisa-Karsch-Strasse 2, 10178 Berlin,
Germany

Tushar Desai

Department of Medicine and Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94116

Oliver Eickelberg

Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of
Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, US

Roland Eils

Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin, HumboldtUniversität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany
Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Center for Digital Health, Anna-Louisa-Karsch-Strasse 2, 10178 Berlin,
Germany
Health Data Science Unit, Heidelberg University Hospital and BioQuant, Im Neuenheimer Feld 267, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany

Patrick T. Ellinor

Precision Cardiology Laboratory, The Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA 02142
Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA 02114

Alen Faiz

Respiratory Bioinformatics and Molecular Biology, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia.

Christine S Falk

Institute of Transplant Immunology, Hannover Medical School, MHH, Carl-Neuberg Str. 1, 30625
Hannover, Germany, phone +40 511 532 9745; fax +40 511 532 8090; German Center for Infectious
Diseases DZIF, TTU-IICH 07.801

Michael Farzan

Department of Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, Florida, USA
(33458)

Andrew Gellman

Department of Statistics, Columbia University

Gad Getz

Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA
Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
Cancer Center and Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

Ian A Glass

Department of Pediatrics, Genetic Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington;

Anna Greka

Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA

Muzlifah Haniffa

Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK; Biosciences
Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK;
Department of Dermatology and NIHR Newcastle Biomedical Research Centre, Newcastle Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4LP, UK.

61

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Lida P Hariri

Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine and Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

Peter Horvath

Synthetic and Systems Biology Unit, Biological Research Centre (BRC), Szeged, Hungary; Institute for
Molecular Medicine Finland, University of Helsinki

Norbert Hübner

Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz
Association (MDC), 13125 Berlin, Germany; DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research),
Partner Site Berlin, 13347 Berlin, Germany; Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), 10178 Berlin, Germany;
Charité-Universitätsmedizin, 10117 Berlin, Germany

Deborah T Hung

Professor of Genetics, Department of Genetics at Harvard Medical School and Department of Molecular
Biology at Massachusetts General Hospital; Co-Director, Infectious Disease and Microbiome Program
and Core Faculty Member, Broad Institute of MIT & Harvard

Dejan Juric

Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center,
Boston, MA 02114

Naftali Kaminski

Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine

Gerard H Koppelman

Department of Pediatric Pulmonology and Pediatric Allergology, Beatrix Children’s Hospital, University
of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG), Groningen Research Institute for Asthma
and COPD, Groningen, Netherlands

Mark A Krasnow

Department of Biochemistry and Wall Center for Pulmonary Vascular Disease

Jonathan A Kropski

Division of Allergy, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN; Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Nashville, TN;
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN

Malte Kuhnemund

Cartana AB, Nobels vag 16, 17165 Stockholm, Sweden

Robert Lafyatis

Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh,
PA, USA.

Majlinda Lako

Biosciences Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, International Centre for Life,
Bioscience West Building, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3 BZ, UK

Eric S. Lander

Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA

Haeock Lee

Department of Biomedicine and Health Sciences, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea

Sylvie Leroy

Université Côte d'Azur, CHU de Nice, FHU OncoAge, Department of Pulmonary Medicine and
Allergology, Nice, France ; CNRS UMR 7275 - Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Sophia
Antipolis, France

Sten Linnarsson

Division of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska
Institute

Yuk Ming Dennis Lo

Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories,
Hong Kong SAR, China

Joakim Lundeberg

SciLifeLab, Department of Gene Technology, KTH Royal Institute of Technology

John C Marioni

Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK European Molecular Biology
Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, UK

Benjamin D. Medoff

Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

Kerstin B Meyer

Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK

Zhichao Miao

Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK

62

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Alexander V Misharin

Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois

Martijn C Nawijn

Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, University of Groningen, GRIAC Research institue,
University Medical Center Groningen, the Netherlands

Marko Z Nikolić

UCL Respiratory, Division of Medicine, University College London, London, UK

Michela Noseda

National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, UK; British Heart Foundation Centre for
Research Excellence and Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Imperial College London, UK

Jose Ordovas-Montanes

Division of Gastroenterology Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; Program in Immunology,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA;
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Gavin Y Oudit

Canada Research Chair in Heart Failure, Division of Cardiology, 2C2 Walter Mackenzie Health Sciences
Centre, Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 2B7, Canada

Dana Pe’er

Computational and Systems Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA

Joseph E Powell

Garvan-Weizmann Centre for Cellular Genomics, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, NSW,
Australia; UNSW Cellular Genomics Futures Institute, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW,
Australia

Stephen R Quake

Depts of Bioengineering and Applied Physics, Stanford University, and the Chan Zuckerberg Biohub.

Jayaraj Rajagopal

Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts; Center for Regenerative Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts

Purushothama Rao Tata

Department of Cell Biology, Regeneration Next Initiative, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham,
NC, USA, 27710

Emma L Rawlins

Wellcome Trust/ CRUK Gurdon Institute and Department Physiology, Development and Neuroscience,
University of Cambridge

Aviv Regev

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA 02142

Paul A Reyfman

Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine

Mauricio Rojas

Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh

Orit Rozenblatt-Rosen

Orit Rozenblatt-Rosen, Affiliation: Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA

Kourosh Saeb- Parsy

Department of Surgery, University of Cambridge and NIHR Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, UK

Christos Samakovlis

SciLifeLab, Department of Molecular Biosciences, Stockholm University, Stockholm Sweden and
Cardiopulmonary Institute, Justus Liebig University; Giessen Germany

Joshua R. Sanes

Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138

Herbert B Schiller

Comprehensive Pneumology Center (CPC) / Institute of Lung Biology and Disease (ILBD), Helmholtz
Zentrum München, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany

Joachim L Schultze

Department for Genomics & Immunoregulation, LIMES-Institute, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn,
Germany
PRECISE Platform for Single Cell Genomics & Epigenomics, Germany Center for Neurodegenerative
Diseases and University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany

Roland. F Schwarz

Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology, Max Delbrück Center, Berlin, Germany

63

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Ayellet V Segre

Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
Ocular Genomics Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Boston, MA,
USA.

Max A Seibold

Department of Pediatrics; Center for Genes, Environment, and Health; National Jewish Health; Denver,
CO 80206

Christine E. Seidman

Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Cardiovascular Division,
Brigham & Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute

Jon G. Seidman

Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

Alex K Shalek

Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA; Institute for Medical Engineering
and Science (IMES), Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, and Department of Chemistry,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA

Alex K. Shalek

Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Department of Chemistry & Koch Institute for Integrative
Cancer Research, MIT; Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

Douglas P Shepherd

Center for Biological Physics and Department of Physics, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ USA

Jason R Spence

Department of Internal Medicine, Gastroenterology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
MI 48109, USA; Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical School,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Michigan College of
Engineering, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Avrum Spira

Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA; Johnson & Johnson
Innovation, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Xin Sun

Department of Pediatrics, Department of Biological Sciences, University of California SD, 9500 Gilman
Dr. MC0766, San Diego, CA 92093-0766

Erik Sundström

Division of Neurodegeneration, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska
Institutet
Cellular Genetics Programme, Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge CB10 1SA, United Kingdom.

Sarah A Teichmann

Dept Physics/Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, JJ Thompson Ave, Cambridge CB3 0EH,
United Kingdom.

Fabian J Theis

Institute of Computational Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München and Departments of Mathematics and
Life Sciences, Technical University Munich, Germany

Alexander M. Tsankov

Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY USA

Ludovic Vallier

Wellcome and MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, Jeffrey Cheah Biomedical Centre, Biomedical
Campus, Puddicombe Way, Cambridge CB2 0AW, UK; Department of Surgery, Cambridge Biomedical
Campus, Hills Rd, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK

Maarten van den Berge

Department of Pulmonary diseases and tuberculosis, University of Groningen, GRIAC Research institue,
University Medical Center Groningen, the Netherlands

Tave A. Van Zyl

Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Boston, MA
02114

Alexandra-Chloé Villani

Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA
Center for Cancer Research, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
Center for Immunology and Inflammatory Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA,
USA

Astrid Weins

Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

64

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Ramnik J Xavier

Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Broad Institute

Laure
Zaragosi

Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, IPMC, Sophia-Antipolis, 06560, France

Emmanuelle

Ali Önder Yildirim

Comprehensive Pneumology Center (CPC) / Institute of Lung Biology and Disease (ILBD), Helmholtz
Zentrum München, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany

Darin Zerti

Biosciences Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, International Centre for Life,
Bioscience West Building, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3 BZ, UK; Microscopy Centre and Department of
Applied Clinical Sciences and Biotechnology, University of L’Aquila, via Vetoio, 67100 Coppito, L’Aquila,
Italy

Hongbo Zhang

Key Laboratory for Stem Cells and Tissue Engineering, Ministry of Education and Department of
Histology and Embryology of Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510080,
China

Kun Zhang

UCSD Department of Bioengineering, 9500 Gilman Drive, MC0412, PFBH402, La Jolla, CA 92093-0412

65

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Fig. 1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Fig. 2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Fig. 3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Fig. 4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Fig. 5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Fig. 6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Fig. 7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Fig. 8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Fig. 9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Fig. 10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Fig. 11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Fig. 12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Fig. 13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Fig. 14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Fig. 15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254; this version posted April 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Fig. 16

