bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Systematic discovery and functional interrogation of SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA-host protein interactions
during infection
Ryan A. Flynn​1,10,#​, Julia A. Belk​2,3,10​, Yanyan Qi​3​, Yuki Yasumoto​4​, Cameron O. Schmitz​5,6​, Maxwell R.
Mumbach​7​, Aditi Limaye​3​, Jin Wei​5,6​, Mia Madel Alfajaro​5,6​, Kevin R. Parker​7​, Howard Y. Chang​7,8​, Tamas L.
Horvath​4​, Jan E. Carette​9​, Carolyn Bertozzi​1,8​, Craig B. Wilen​5,6,#​, Ansuman T. Satpathy​3,#
1​

Stanford ChEM-H and Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
3​
Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
4​
Program in Integrative Cell Signaling and Neurobiology of Metabolism, Department of Comparative Medicine,
Yale University, New Haven, CT.
5​
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.
6​
Department of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.
7​
Center for Personal Dynamic Regulomes, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
8​
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA.
9​
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
10 ​
These authors contributed equally
#​
Co-corresponding authors
2​

To whom correspondence should be addressed: raflynn@stanford.edu, craig.wilen@yale.edu,
satpathy@stanford.edu
Lead Contact: raflynn@stanford.edu

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the cause of a pandemic with growing
global mortality. There is an urgent need to understand the molecular pathways required for host infection and
anti-viral immunity. Using comprehensive identification of RNA-binding proteins by mass spectrometry
(ChIRP-MS), we identified 309 host proteins that bind the SARS-CoV-2 RNA during active infection. Integration
of this data with viral ChIRP-MS data from three other positive-sense RNA viruses defined pan-viral and
SARS-CoV-2-specific host interactions. Functional interrogation of these factors with a genome-wide CRISPR
screen revealed that the vast majority of viral RNA-binding proteins protect the host from virus-induced cell
death, and we identified known and novel anti-viral proteins that regulate SARS-CoV-2 pathogenicity. Finally,
our RNA-centric approach demonstrated a physical connection between SARS-CoV-2 RNA and host
mitochondria, which we validated with functional and electron microscopy data, providing new insights into a
more general virus-specific protein logic for mitochondrial interactions. Altogether, these data provide a
comprehensive catalogue of SARS-CoV-2 RNA-host protein interactions, which may inform future studies to
understand the mechanisms of viral pathogenesis, as well as nominate host pathways that could be targeted
for therapeutic benefit.

Highlights
· ChIRP-MS of SARS-CoV-2 RNA identifies a comprehensive viral RNA-host protein interaction network during
infection across two species
· Comparison to RNA-protein interaction networks with Zika virus, dengue virus, and rhinovirus identify
SARS-CoV-2-specific and pan-viral RNA protein complexes and highlights distinct intracellular trafficking
pathways
· Intersection of ChIRP-MS and genome-wide CRISPR screens identify novel SARS-CoV-2-binding proteins
with pro- and anti-viral function
· Viral RNA-RNA and RNA-protein interactions reveal specific SARS-CoV-2-mediated mitochondrial
dysfunction during infection

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Introduction
Despite similarities in replication strategies of their compact genomes, positive single stranded RNA
viruses cause a remarkable variety of human diseases. Mosquito-borne flaviviruses such as dengue virus and
Zika virus cause systemic disease, while human coronaviruses generally cause respiratory symptoms
(Ahlquist, 2006; Carrasco-Hernandez et al., 2017)​. The recent pandemic emergence of the novel coronavirus
SARS-CoV-2, which can cause potentially fatal COVID-19 disease, illustrates the threat to public health posed
by RNA viruses. Less than one year into the outbreak, more than 33 million people have been infected by
SARS-CoV-2, and one million people have died. The severity of the virus has caused global economic
disruption and treatment options remain limited, due to, in part, an incomplete understanding of the molecular
determinants of viral pathogenesis.
The process of infecting a host cell is complex, multistep, and often highly virus-specific. Viruses must
traffic to, bind, and enter host cells, and once inside the cell, their genetic material leverages and remodels
cellular pathways to express, replicate, and produce new infectious virions. RNA viruses deposit large
autonomous RNA transcripts into the dense intracellular milieu of the host cells, which eventually generate
virally-encoded protein products. Together, these RNA and protein species remodel the cell to facilitate the
viral life cycle. We and others have demonstrated the utility of functionally exploring how different
virally-derived molecules hijack the host, in particular in the context of flaviviruses ​(Li et al., 2020)​. For
example, mapping physical associations between the host and virus at the level of protein-protein interactions
(PPI) have defined key pathways relevant to infection ​(Eckhardt et al., 2020)​. In parallel to efforts that focus on
viral proteins, a number of groups have taken an RNA-centric view of the host-viral interface to understand
how host cells recognize and respond to the RNA genome ​(Kim et al., 2020a; Lenarcic et al., 2013; Ooi et al.,
2019; Phillips et al., 2016; Viktorovskaya et al., 2016)​. Finally, genetic screening efforts provide another, more
direct strategy to discover cellular proteins and pathways that are essential for viral replication or that are part
of the host innate immune responses ​(Puschnik et al., 2017; Schoggins and Rice, 2011)​. Each of these
approaches has limitations and captures only one aspect of the host-virus interface, but together they begin to
unravel the complex machinery evolved by each virus to invade and function within the host cell.
While there has been significant past work to understand coronaviruses ​(Cockrell et al., 2018; Gralinski
and Baric, 2015)​, the emergence of novel strains which are highly transmissible and cause severe disease in
humans ​(Menachery et al., 2015) has underscored the need to refine our understanding of: (1) the basic
mechanisms of their life cycle, (2) how they modulate host processes at both the cellular and organismal level,
and (3) how the host combats infection with intracellular and systems-level defense mechanisms. Recent
studies have described SARS-CoV-2 encoded proteins ​(Kim et al., 2020b) and their interacting host partners
(Gordon et al., 2020)​; however, there is a gap in understanding of the precise host interactions of the
SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA (vRNA). To address this gap, we used ChIRP-MS ​(Chu et al., 2015)​, which provides a
comprehensive view of the host interactions of vRNAs spanning all subcellular domains where the RNA is
present. This strategy provided an opportunity to define the shared and SARS-CoV-2-specific host pathways
that associate with vRNAs. We combined the RNA-centric approach with genome-wide genetic perturbations
to define known and novel host factors relevant to the SARS-CoV-2 life cycle and discovered a functional and
specific interface between SARS-CoV-2 and the host mitochondria.
Results
ChIRP-MS of SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA in infected mammalian cells
To define the host protein interactome of the ~30kb SARS-CoV-2 vRNA, we performed ChIRP-MS
(​Figure 1A​). ChIRP-MS is advantageous as a discovery tool because it uses formaldehyde as a crosslinking
agent to recover entire protein complexes associated with cellular RNAs ​(Chu and Chang, 2018; Chu et al.,
2015)​. We selected two cell lines: (1) Huh7.5, one of the few human cell models that is naturally susceptible to
productive infection by SARS-CoV-2, and (2) VeroE6, a monkey kidney cell line that dominates the research
space for preparation and propagation of SARS-CoV-2 and other viruses ​(Harcourt et al., 2020; Zhou et al.,
2020)​. We tiled 108 biotinylated oligonucleotide probes (​Table S1​) to capture the full length positive-strand

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

vRNA, which includes subgenomic RNA (sgRNA) species that accumulate to higher copy numbers during
infection ​(Kim et al., 2020b)​. In addition to the interspecies and cell type comparisons, we also performed
ChIRP-MS experiments at two different time points, 24- and 48-hours post infection (h.p.i.), to assess the
temporal association of host factors with the vRNA (​Figure 1A​). From each condition, input and
ChIRP-enriched RNA and protein samples were saved for later analysis (​Figure 1A​). Initially, we assessed the
recovery and profile of the enriched proteins by SDS-PAGE analysis (​Figure 1B​). As expected, mock samples
(uninfected, acting as probe-only controls) had little protein staining, while we observed an infection and
time-dependent increase in total protein recovered after infection of either cell line with SARS-CoV-2 (​Figure
1B​). The clear band present in all infected samples at ~50kDa is consistent with the viral nucleocapsid (N)
protein (​Figure 1B​), a major RNA binding protein (RBP) of the coronavirus RNAs ​(Chang et al., 2014)​. We
next assessed the technical quality of the ChIRP experiment by analyzing viral and host RNAs recovered
before and after pulldown. RNA sequencing from mock samples resulted in negligible mapping to the
SARS-CoV-2 genome before or after pulldown, as expected (​Figure S1A​). In contrast, in SARS-CoV-2
infected cells, we observed a basal level of 2.7% (Huh7.5 48 h.p.i) and 14.4% (VeroE6 48 h.p.i) of all reads in
total RNA mapping to the viral genomic RNA, which increased to 60% (Huh7.57 48 h.p.i) and 68% (VeroE6 48
h.p.i) after pulldown, demonstrating robust enrichment of vRNA after ChIRP (​Figure S1A​). These results are
consistent with prior studies demonstrating higher rates of infection in VeroE6 cells, compared to most other
cell lines ​(Harcourt et al., 2020)​. Since coronaviruses produce full length, as well as sgRNAs, we next
assessed whether the ChIRP-MS was biased for the higher molar copy sgRNAs. Analysis of the reads
mapping to the SARS-CoV-2 genomic RNA showed that both input and ChIRP-enriched samples had robust
coverage of the ORF1a/b region, as well as in the sgRNA regions, and that the enrichment was visually and
quantitatively similar across Huh7.5 and VeroE6 (​Figure 1C-E​). Together these protein- and RNA-level quality
controls demonstrate the robust and broad sampling of the entire SARS-CoV-2 positive-strand vRNA by the
designed ChIRP-MS probes.
We first asked whether any of the SARS-CoV-2 encoded proteins were enriched after pulldown of the
vRNA. Viruses hijack host factors but also encode a select group of proteins that are critical for their life cycle.
To date, SARS-CoV-2 has been shown to encode 16 nonstructural proteins, 4 structural proteins and 6
accessory proteins ​(Finkel et al., 2020)​, several with annotated RNA binding capacity (​Figure 1E​, known RBPs
in red). We observed that 13 of 26 viral proteins were reproducibly enriched (mean log​2 enrichment ≥ 1 in at
least one dataset), including known and novel RNA-binding viral proteins. In the sgRNA region, the major viral
proteins conserved across cell types were N, M, and S, while ORF3a and 7a were selectively enriched from
infected Huh7.5 cells (​Figure 1F​). Within the larger ORF1a/b, nsp3 and nsp4 were enriched in both species,
however we saw stronger association of the annotated RBPs in VeroE6 infected cells (​Figure 1F​). The robust
enrichment of specific ORF1a/b encoded proteins provides strong evidence that the ChIRP-MS approach
samples interactions across the entire length of the genomic RNA. Considering the VeroE6- and
Huh7.5-specific associations, we note that these cells have many differences (including species, cell type, and
sex of organism), any of which may cause the observed differences in ChIRP enrichments. One consideration
is that VeroE6 cells are well characterized to support high SARS-CoV-2 replication and efficient viral egress,
while replication in Huh7.5 cells reaches lower peak levels with delayed kinetics ​(Harcourt et al., 2020)​.
Nonetheless, viral protein enrichments were quite specific and reproducible, and the different features of these
cell lines enable us to define a core SARS-CoV-2-associated proteome which is conserved across these cell
types and infection timepoints.
A comprehensive atlas of host-factors that interact with the SARS-CoV-2 genomic RNA
To define the host-derived interacting proteins of the SARS-CoV-2 vRNA, we searched the ChIRP-MS
data against a database of known monkey (VeroE6) or human (Huh7.5) proteins. Using stringent statistical
cutoffs (​p adjusted ≤ 0.05, fold change > 0), we defined high-confidence interactomes in each condition
(​Figure 2A, 2B​). A total of 163 (VeroE6) and 229 (Huh7.5) host factors bound to the SARS-CoV-2 vRNA
(​Table S2​). Analysis of the factors enriched at 24 vs. 48 h.p.i revealed that most factors enriched in VeroE6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

cells were invariant between the two time points (​Figure 2C​, left) while the Huh7.5 interactome evolved more
dramatically over this period, with 48 h.p.i. showing an expanded set of interacting proteins (​Figure 2C​,
middle). We next compared the associated host factors across species and found a core set of 83 factors
co-bound in both species, totaling 309 host factors aggregated across species (​Figure 2C​, right). The Huh7.5
cells accumulated the greatest number of specific host factors during the course of infection, and we found the
human proteome to be substantially better annotated than the monkey proteome, so we focused our analysis
on the human dataset.
In an effort to better understand the set of host factors associated with the SARS-CoV-2 RNA, we
visualized the high confidence human interactome using Cytoscape ​(Shannon et al., 2003) (​Figure 2D​). In this
analysis, each node is a protein significantly enriched in the Huh7.5 ChIRP-MS dataset in at least one time
point and is colored by its enrichment at 48 h.p.i. in Huh7.5 cells. Nodes are connected if there is a previously
described protein-protein interaction (​Figure 2D​). Structuring this network by broad functional categories
demonstrated the diversity of host proteins associated with the vRNA, spanning generic RNA adaptor proteins,
RNA helicases, RNA processing enzymes, and RNA modification enzymes (​Figure 2D​). We also noticed a set
of relatively unexpected pathways which had multiple robust factors binding, including a suite of metabolic
enzymes, intracellular vesicle proteins, cytosolic signaling, and cytoskeleton and intracellular trafficking
proteins (​Figure 2D​).
Using this network, we next performed a series of comparisons in order to contextualize the ChIRP-MS
results. First, we asked how the host viral-binding factors changed from 24 to 48 h.p.i. We found that earlier in
the infection in Huh7.5 cells, a core set of RBPs were strongly bound (top left region of the network) while the
rest of the network only became associated after 48 hours, suggesting these RBPs may be important for the
earliest steps of detection or replication of the vRNA (​Figure S2A​). Comparing the VeroE6 and Huh7.5
interactomes showed that the core RBPs were also very highly conserved across species, as were other
categories such as nuclear complexes, poly-A binding proteins, and serine/arginine rich splicing factors (SR
proteins) (​Figure S2B​). We next compared the ChIRP-MS results to a set of host factors identified by vRNA
pulldown after UV-C crosslinking (RNA Antisense Purification (RAP) MS, ​Schmidt et al., 2020)​. We overlaid
these proteins onto the ChIRP-MS interaction network and found the majority (30/48, 63%) were also enriched
in ChIRP-MS (​Figure S3A, S3B​). However, ChIRP-MS enriched an additional 199 proteins that were not
identified as significant in the UV-C dataset. The substantial increase in scope of ChIRP-enriched factors is
consistent with prior reports ​(Ooi et al., 2019) and the broader crosslinking capability of formaldehyde,
compared to UV-C, which specifically captures direct RNA-protein interactions. Finally, we compared the
ChIRP-MS data to a recently published and comprehensive characterization of the host-viral protein-protein
interactome of 26 SARS-CoV-2 encoded proteins ​(Gordon et al., 2020)​. We found that only 11/332 host factors
(3.3%) from the PPI study overlapped with the ChIRP-MS network (​Figure S3A, S3C​), demonstrating that
SARS-CoV-2 vRNA and proteins largely interact with distinct protein complexes inside of the cell. However, of
the 11 host factors that bind both vRNA and viral proteins, RAB2A, RAB7A, and RAB10 have been validated
as functional in SARS-CoV-2 infection ​(Hoffmann et al., 2020)​. Altogether, these comparisons highlight the
orthogonality of an RNA-centric approach to PPI-based studies, and the power of formaldehyde crosslinking to
discover larger cellular complexes associated with vRNAs during infection.
Inter-virus analysis of host factors reveals specificity of interacting cellular pathways
It has become increasingly clear that interactions of vRNAs with proteins play key roles in multiple
aspects of viral infection, either through the recruitment of host factors essential for viral translation and
replication, or as interaction partners for cellular proteins involved in anti-viral responses ​(Fritzlar et al., 2019;
Garcia-Blanco et al., 2016; Hosmillo et al., 2019)​. To understand commonalities and differences in how
positive-stranded RNA viruses have evolved to interact with their host, we sought to compare the SARS-CoV-2
dataset to our previously generated ChIRP-MS data from the flaviviruses Zika (ZIKV, ZIKV-PRVABC59) and
Dengue-2 (DENV, DENV-16681), as well as a human picornavirus, rhinovirus (RV, RV-B14) ​(Ooi et al., 2019)​.
We note that all datasets were collected from Huh7.5 cells except for the rhinovirus data, which was collected

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

from HeLa cells. We first used principal component analysis (PCA) to broadly investigate the associated host
factors enriched across viruses and found that PC1 separated all 4 viral types and PC2 further distinguished
RV and demonstrated the time-dependent host factor changes for SARS-CoV-2 (​Figure 3A​). Next, to facilitate
quantitative comparisons between the viruses, for each virus, we defined an “expanded interactome”
consisting of proteins reproducibly enriched (average log​2 fold change ≥ 1) for each ChIRP-MS dataset in
human cells: SARS-D1 (Huh7.5 24 h.p.i.), SARS-D2 (Huh7.5 48 h.p.i.), ZIKV-D2, DENV-D2, and RV-D2.
Comparing the datasets at the day 2 time point, each expanded interactome consisted of about 1000 proteins
associated with each vRNA (​Figure 3B​). We found that the largest group of 425 proteins was shared across all
ChIRP-MS datasets: SARS-D2, both flaviviruses, and RV-D2 (​Figure 3B​). Despite the difference in input
proteome, the RV-D2 expanded interactome had a similar number of unique proteins (181) as that of SARS-D2
(167). There were 138 proteins interacting with both flaviviruses (DENV and ZIKV) but neither SARS-CoV-2
nor RV. Full expanded interactome data is provided in ​Table S3​.
To understand the general pathways and associations of each virus, we performed GO term analysis
on the expanded interactomes of each virus. Consistent with the RNA-centric aspect of ChIRP, all viruses
robustly enriched the intracellular RNP complex term; however, we found patterns of specificity when
examining other cellular pathway terms (​Figure 3C​). For example, SARS-CoV-2 displayed a reduced
enrichment with the ER and ribosome, but an increased enrichment with mitochondria and proteasome (​Figure
3C, ​top). Examining functional terms again corroborated a decreased enrichment with translation and splicing
factors in the SARS-CoV-2 interactome, compared to that of the flaviviruses, but a specific increased
enrichment with multiple immune pathways such as antigen presentation, NF-κb signaling, and TNF signaling
(​Figure 3C​, bottom). While the GO terms provide an initial high level assessment of the associated factors, we
next wanted to understand how these pathways or protein complexes look at the individual factor level. Guided
by the SARS-CoV-2-specific enrichment of the proteasomal GO term, we visualized all the individual subunits
of the proteasome found in any of the ChIRP-MS datasets (​Figure 3D​). Consistent with the GO term analysis,
DENV, ZIKV, and RV all poorly associated with this set of proteins while there was broad and robust
enrichment with the SARS-CoV-2 vRNA, in particular at D2 (​Figure 3D​). Previous work has reported a
functional connection to proper proteasome function and coronavirus life cycles ​(Raaben et al., 2010)​, which
together with our ChIRP-MS data may suggest the vRNA directly leverages the proteasome during infection,
potentially to modulate antigen presentation and/or evade host adaptive immunity. The specificity of
association between the proteasome and the SARS-CoV-2 RNA and clear validation of this interaction in the
literature motivated us to explore the set of RNA-centric viral interactomes across a number of other important
cellular pathways (​Table S3​).
RNA binding proteins
First we focused on the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs), a large set of adaptor
proteins, and dead-box helicases, which remodel RNA structural elements ​(Geuens et al., 2016; Jankowsky,
2011)​. These RBP families have a wide array of cellular functions and are often recovered with host or
pathogenic RNAs in binding studies ​(Geuens et al., 2016; Meier-Stephenson et al., 2018; Taschuk and Cherry,
2020)​. The hnRNP class showed robust interaction with all 4 viruses and similar enrichments for the majority of
the 20 proteins we identified (​Figure 4A​). The DDX proteins, despite being ubiquitously and highly expressed,
showed a more virus-specific binding profile wherein family members such as DDX3X, 5, 6, and 38B were
similar across viruses, while DDX21, 23, 42, and 46 were more specifically associated with the DENV and RV
RNAs (​Figure 4A​). As noted above, these direct RBPs associate with the virus early in infection and may
include the initial sensors of infection.
Translational apparatus
After entry into the cytosol, one of the first steps of the viral life cycle is to begin to express the protein
products encoded in its genome, which requires interactions with the host translational apparatus. Work
examining the translational capacity of RNA viruses has show that, in contrast to flaviviruses, which are more

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

efficiently translated than cellular mRNAs under cellular stress ​(Edgil et al., 2006; Roth et al., 2017)​, the
coronaviruses do not translate their mRNAs at higher efficiency than cellular mRNAs during infection ​(Finkel et
al., 2020)​. A comparison of enriched translation initiation factors (eIFs) demonstrated quantitative differences
across the viruses: flaviviruses strongly enriched EIF3A, 4G1, 3C and 3D while SARS-CoV-2 was relatively
depleted for these factors but preferred EIF3B, 4H, 4B, 3F, A3, among others (​Figure 3C​). These data point to
a more specialized configuration of the initiation complex on different viral genomes. Beyond translational
initiation, we visualized enrichment for the core components of the 80S ribosome (​Figure 4B​). Here we note
that while there was specificity in the enrichment of specific ribosomal proteins (RPs), more striking was the
generalized lack of association of the vast majority of the RPs to the SARS-CoV-2 vRNA, compared to either
DENV or ZIKV (​Figure 4B​). This is consistent with recent reports demonstrating global translation inhibition by
SARS-CoV-2 encoded nsp1 ​(Schubert et al., 2020; Thoms et al., 2020)​. How SARS-CoV-2 simultaneously
inhibits host translation to shut down innate immune responses yet also manages to translate its own proteins
remains unclear, although recent work points to a functional role for the 5’ UTR of the viral RNA--likely together
with yet-unidentified translation initiation factors--in promoting efficient translation even in the presence of nsp1
(Schubert et al., 2020)​.
Sec, translocon, and ER-golgi transport
Flaviviruses and coronaviruses encode glycoproteins, but picornaviruses do not. We and others
previously showed that RV weakly enriches factors related to membrane biology, in contrast to the functional
use of membrane organelles like the ER by flaviviruses ​(Fernandez-Garcia et al., 2009; Mukhopadhyay et al.,
2005; Ooi et al., 2019)​. Given the strong dependence of flaviviruses on the translocon, the channel for nascent
peptide entry into the ER lumen, and adjacent protein complexes, we compared these factors across the viral
ChIRP-MS data (​Figure 4C​). We found that while SARS-CoV-2 does robustly enrich ER-tethered (RRBP1) or
associated (HDLBP/vigilin) RBPs, it is less strongly associated with the ER-targeting complex (SRP) or the
Sec/translocon itself. However, SARS-CoV-2’s vRNA associates with the COPI vesicle complexes in a more
similar manner to the flaviviruses. COPI proteins are canonically responsible for retrograde transport of
vesicles from the golgi to ER ​(Szul and Sztul, 2011)​. The association with COPI complex members is
consistent with the reported cycling of SARS-CoV in the ER-Golgi network for eventual budding into the lumen
ER-Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC, ​(McBride et al., 2007)​). Our data therefore suggest that
ER-resident RBPs may be commonly leveraged for flavivirus and coronavirus life cycles, while other
membrane-associated factors are more virus-specific.
Intracellular vesicles and trafficking
Given the differences in associations with the major translational and translocation machinery at the
ER, we explored how other intracellular vesicle and trafficking complexes might differ across viruses. This is of
additional interest in SARS-CoV-2 infection given the developing evidence of the intracellular
double-membrane vesicles which are produced ​(Wolff et al., 2020)​. We found many host factors involved in
cytokinesis, actin filaments, cytoskeleton, and microtubules associated with the vRNAs but a particular bias in
association with the SARS-CoV-2 vRNA relative to others (​Figure 4D​). Recent reports highlighted the physical
association of Rab GTPase family members with viral proteins and their functional importance in the
temperature-dependent life cycle of coronaviruses ​(Gordon et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2020)​. Our ChIRP-MS
data robustly supports these observations as we find that four Rab proteins, RAB1B, RAB2A, RAB7A, and
RAB10, were all present in the SARS-CoV-2 high confidence interactome (​Figure 2D​) with multiple others
strongly associated with the SARS-CoV-2 RNA (​Figure 4D​). Looking beyond SARS-CoV-2, we found that
DENV and ZIKV also strongly recover RAB2A and RAB10, which could suggest these viruses may be subject
to similar regulation in this pathway as SARS-CoV-2.
N​6​-methyladenosine

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Post-transcriptional regulation of RNA is a rapidly growing field of study and one chemical modification
that has received renewed interest has been m6A: methylation of the N-6 position on adenine ​(Yue et al.,
2015; Zaccara et al., 2019)​. A wide range of cellular processes have been now associated with this
modification and recently it has been reported that m6A is deposited on the vRNA of ZIKV ​(Lichinchi et al.,
2016)​. This appears to be an anti-viral mechanism as binding of YTH-family proteins (which recognize m6A)
subsequently cause degradation of the ZIKV vRNA ​(Lichinchi et al., 2016)​. We therefore examined the
association of the writers (METTL-family), readers (YTH-family) and erasers (ALKBH-family) of m6A across the
4 viral ChIRP-MS datasets. Consistent with the work reporting m6A’s role in ZIKV infection, we saw a robust
association of the YTHDF-family with ZIKV and DENV genomic RNAs (​Figure 4E​). RV also robustly captured
these proteins however SARS-CoV-2 lacked robust enrichment of these proteins. Conversely, we found
relatively stronger enrichment of the m6A-demethylases associated with the SARS-CoV-2 vRNA while ZIKV,
DENV, and RV all poorly bound these proteins (​Figure 4E​). ChIRP-MS therefore suggests that SARS-CoV-2
may evade robust m6A modification in order to stabilize it’s vRNA inside infected cells.
Intersection of ChIRP-MS and CRISPR perturbation screens assign functional relevance to RNA-protein
interactions
To understand the functional role of host proteins identified by ChIRP-MS in SARS-CoV-2
pathogenicity, we intersected the ChIRP-MS results with CRISPR perturbation data from our previous study,
which utilized a library composed of 83,963 gene-targeting single guide RNAs to identify host genes essential
for cell survival after SARS-CoV-2 infection in VeroE6 cells ​(Wei et al., 2020)​. This CRISPR screen was
designed to identify both pro- and anti-viral host factors: depletion of guide RNAs after infection indicated that
the gene had host-protective or anti-viral function, and knockout of the gene sensitized the cell to virus-induced
cell death, while enrichment of guide RNAs after infection indicated that the gene had pro-viral function, and
knockout of the gene conferred resistance to virus-induced cell death. We first calculated CRISPR z-scores for
the core (309) and expanded (1430) host protein interactomes identified by ChIRP-MS and identified 33 core
factors and 98 expanded factors that had a functional impact on host cell survival after SARS-CoV-2 infection
(​Figure 5A-D​). Surprisingly, CRISPR-targeting of 29/33 core factors and 87/98 expanded factors resulted in
sensitization to SARS-CoV-2-induced cell death, demonstrating that the vast majority of host factors that bind
the vRNA are host-protective, rather than pro-viral factors. For both interactomes, this bias towards sensitizing
genes was significant compared to the distribution of all hits in the genome-wide screen (p < 0.0002, all hits vs
core ChIRP-MS interactome, and p < 2x10​-7​, all hits vs expanded ChIRP-MS interactome, Mann-Whitney test,
Figure 5C​).
Further examination of the functional hits in the SARS-CoV-2 ChIRP-MS interactome revealed known
and novel genes in viral pathogenesis (​Figure 5A-D​). For example, TARDBP knockout sensitizes cells to
SARS-CoV-2 infection, and indeed, this protein has previously been shown to have anti-viral activity in the
context of Human Immunodeficiency Virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection in humans by directly binding to a particular
regulatory motif within the HIV-1 RNA genome and thereby repressing viral gene expression ​(Ou et al., 1995)​.
Similarly, NONO has a previously characterized anti-viral role in the context of HIV and poliovirus infection,
where it acts as a sensor for viral DNA and activates cGAS to trigger innate immunity ​(Lahaye et al., 2018;
Lenarcic et al., 2013)​. CNBP is another factor that sensitizes host cells to infection and has also been shown to
recognize diverse intracellular microbial products to drive inflammatory cytokine gene expression, particularly
IL-12β ​(Chen et al., 2018)​. Members of the SWI/SNF protein family, SMARCA4 and SMARCA5 were among
the strongest genome-wide hits in either direction ​(Wei et al., 2020)​. SWI/SNF proteins can form multiple
distinct complexes and are thought to function predominantly in the nucleus, but we identified associations with
the vRNA. Both SMARCA4 and SMARCA5 are ATPases but participate in distinct protein complexes,
consistent with their opposing functional activities (​Figure 5B​). We also recovered SMARCC1 in the
ChIRP-MS, consistent with its known complex with SMARCA4. Querying known SMARCA5 interacting
partners, we additionally identified BAZ1A (also known as ACF1) as present in the VeroE6 expanded
interactome, and BAZ1A depletion also sensitized cells to virus-induced death, although less strongly than

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

SMARCA5, suggesting a direct interaction and functional role for the BAZ1A/SMARCA5 complex in viral
infection ​(Oppikofer et al., 2017​, ​Figure S5A​).
Using this list of functional SARS-CoV-2 RNA-binding host factors, we again performed a series of
comparisons to understand their cellular pathways, localization, and virus specificity. First, we compared the
CRISPR data with the previously-described Cytoscape human ChIRP-MS interactome (​Figure 5D​). We
observed that the majority of functional hits were RBPs, helicases, and hnRNPs, which we defined as core
factors that bind the vRNA early during infection (D1), suggesting that the host’s initial response to viral
infection is to mount a diverse vRNA recognition program to restrict the viral life cycle. Extending this analysis
in the context of the cellular organelles and localization described in Figure 4, we found significant CRISPR hits
spanning multiple (but not all) organelles, including proteasome accessory factors PSME3 and PSMG1,
several initiation factors and ribosomal proteins, and cytoskeletal proteins (​Figure 5E​). Again, disruption of
most of these genes sensitized cells to SARS-CoV-2 induced cell death; however, there were exceptions such
as EIF3D and RPS11, which may indicate that the virus co-opts these factors to preferentially translate viral
RNAs. Next, we asked whether functional vRNA-binding factors specifically bound SARS-CoV-2 RNA or were
pan-viral factors that could also be observed in ChIRP-MS of flavivirus and rhinovirus RNA. Of 29 core
sensitization proteins, 21 (75%) were commonly bound by all viruses, suggesting that there is substantial
shared host machinery to sense viral RNA (​Figure 5F​). 8 proteins were SARS-CoV-2-specific, including
CNBP, PPA1, and CLTC, which may represent novel pathways that protect host cells from
coronavirus-induced cell death. Interestingly, many of the SARS-CoV-2-specific sensitization factors were
annotated as having cytoskeletal function, such as CAPZB, NUDC, TBCB, and CLTC, potentially indicating a
novel aspect of SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis relative to the other viruses (​Figure 5D, 5F​). As with core factors,
56/87 (64%) of expanded ChIRP-MS sensitization factors were also commonly bound by all viruses. A
comprehensive catalog of these factors, and their association across viruses, is provided as a resource
(​Figure S5B and ​Table S3​). Finally, we visualized the top 20 sensitizing hits and the complete list (12 total) of
resistance hits present in the expanded interactome (​Figure 5G​). We were particularly interested in the
resistance hits, since they may have direct relevance as drug targets. Two of the most protective hits, ZC3H15
(also known as DFRP1) and DRG1 are proteins that have been shown to interact with each other as well as
the TNF signaling pathway via TRAF-2, and may represent an as-yet unappreciated vulnerability of
SARS-CoV-2 and interface between the virus and host immunity (​Figure 5G​, ​Capalbo et al., 2013; Glingston
et al., 2019)​. In aggregate, we have identified more than 100 host proteins that directly interact with the
SARS-CoV-2 vRNA and are functionally implicated in viral pathogenesis.
A RNA-centric view of SARS-CoV-2 reveal a specific perturbation of mitochondrial during infection
The ChIRP methodology enriches any cellular biopolymer close enough to be crosslinked with
formaldehyde, including not only proteins, but also DNA and RNA. Because of this feature, we re-examined the
RNA samples initially purified for quality control (​Figure 1​) and aligned the reads which did not map to the viral
genome to the host genome (​Figure S1A​). Differential expression analysis revealed 264 and 167 RNAs
significantly enriched with the SARS-CoV-2 vRNA in VeroE6 and Huh7.5 cells, respectively, at 48 h.p.i., which
were largely conserved between different time points (​Figure 6A-B, S5A-B​). These RNAs consisted mostly of
host mRNAs, however we also noticed a robust and consistent enrichment for the RNA components of the
mitochondrial ribosome (mito-ribosome, 12S and 16S RNAs) in both VeroE6 and Huh7.5 cells (​Figure 6A,
6B​).
Within the rest of the enriched RNAs, we found 8 C/D box snoRNAs (e.g. SNORD26, ​Figure 6A​),
which canonocially guide the deposition of 2’-O-methylation. We therefore asked if the proteins guided by C/D
box snoRNAs were also enriched with vRNAs. There are at least eight RNA 2'-O-methyltransferases encoded
in the human genome ​(Ayadi et al., 2019; Dimitrova et al., 2019)​, and we found that three of these are
recovered in at least one of our ChIRP-MS datasets: FBL, MRM2, and MRM3 (​Figure S5C​). FBL is the
canonically active in the nucleolus, while MRM2 and MRM3 have roles more biased for the mitochondria
(Ayadi et al., 2019; Dimitrova et al., 2019)​. All three enzymes showed virus-specific patterns with MRM2 having

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

among the highest enrichment values of any protein enriched in SARS-CoV-2 Huh7.5 D2 cells (​Figure 2B,
S5C​). DENV and ZIKV were both more selective for FBL and MRM2, and RV selective for MRM3; however,
the relative strength of these interactions were substantially weaker than what we observed for the interaction
between MRM2 and SARS-CoV-2 (​Figure S5C​). Together, the association of snoRNAs and MRM2 with the
SARS-CoV-2 vRNA suggests a specific interaction between SARS-CoV-2 and the host mitochondria with a
possible role for 2’-O-methylation in SARS-CoV-2 infection.
The RNA- and protein-based associations with mitochondrial factors supports close physical contact
between the mitochondria and the virus during infection. Indeed, Wu et al. recently reported that SARS-CoV-2
sgRNAs, particularly its 5’ untranslated region, contains sequence elements that strongly direct residency in
mitochondria ​(Wu et al., 2020)​. ​Mitochondria are critical mediators of cellular homeostasis, we therefore
hypothesized that viral infection may disrupt normal mitochondrial activities. Because the number and physical
organization of mitochondria can directly indicate the function of these organelles, we set out to understand
what, if any, changes occur during infection of human cells with SARS-CoV-2. We analyzed electron
microscopy images of SARS-CoV-2 infected human bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs, 48 h.p.i.) with a focus on
the mitochondria (​Figure 6C​, ​(Wei et al., 2020)​). Upon visual inspection, the mitochondria within
SARS-CoV-2-infected cells looked larger, which we confirmed by quantifying 190 mitochondria in five ciliated
(infected) cells (​Figure 6C, 6D​). There was a significant increase in average mitochondrial size in cells infected
with SARS-CoV-2 (​Figure 6D​), suggesting perturbed mitochondrial homeostasis.
To better understand the specificity and impact SARS-CoV-2 has on host mitochondria, we performed
a focused reexamination of the ChIRP-MS data on mitochondrially-related proteins. We extracted ChIRP-MS
enrichment values for human proteins associated with mitochondria (UniProtKB subcellular location of
SL-0173), as well as mitochondrial-genome encoded proteins (​Figure 6E​). Overall, we found 162 (of 810 total,
Table S3​) mito-annotated proteins present in the expanded interactomes of at least one virus. Both DENV and
ZIKV had relatively poor recovery of these proteins, with the exception of the mito-genome encoded proteins
MT-AP, MT-MR6, MT-REX, MD-DH, MT-TP, and MT-HFD1 (​Figure 6E, bottom​). RV and SARS-CoV-2 both
robustly bound to many of these factors but the particular associations are mostly non-overlapping (​Figure 6E,
examples are inset). This suggests that while vRNA may commonly associate with mitochondrial protein
factors, there are virus-specific associations which may lead to differential pathological outcomes.
To assess the functional consequences of mitochondrial perturbation in the context of SARS-CoV-2
infection, we reanalyzed the CRISPR screen data focused on the same 810 mitochondrially-related proteins.
We identified thirteen mitochondria-annotated proteins which were both present in the SARS-CoV-2 expanded
interactome and significant hits in the genome-wide CRISPR screen (​Figure 6F​). Knockout of any of these
thirteen genes individually caused increased cell death in the presence of infection (​Figure 6F​). Inspecting the
genes, we observed an enrichment for those involved in protein synthesis by the mitochondrial ribosome
including: components of the mitochondrial ribosome (MRPL11, MRPL24, MRPL37, and MRPS30), tRNA
synthetases (FARS2, HARS2, and SARS2), an amidotransferase (GATB), a methyltransferase (TRMT10C), an
RNA helicase (DHX30), and a DNA binding protein (SSBP1). Mapping these back to the ChIRP-MS
enrichment, all of these host mitochondrial factors, except DHX30, exhibited specific or biased enrichment for
SARS-CoV-2 RNA compared to that of other viruses (​Figure 6E, red labels​). Four components of the
mitochondrial ribosome (MRPS2, MRPS5, MRPS25, and MRPS27, all distinct from the ChIRP-MS enriched
mito-ribosomal proteins) have additionally been reported to interact with the viral protein nsp8, although the
functional relevance was not determined or speculated upon at the time ​(Gordon et al., 2020)​. More recently,
functional work (CRISPR screening in the Huh7.5 cell line) has independently validated the importance of all
four of these proteins ​(Hoffmann et al., 2020)​. Altogether, these results point to a functionally relevant logic
between viral RNAs and host mitochondria, and more generally suggest the mitochondria may be a major
response organelle that protects from virus-induced death.
Discussion

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

In summary, our results provide an RNA-centric view of the landscape of the host proteins and RNAs
interacting with SARS-CoV-2 RNA during the course of infection. By integrating our analysis across time
points, species, and other viruses, we identify shared and SARS-CoV-2-specific patterns of RNA-host protein
interactions. In the context of the rapidly evolving literature on subcellular mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2
pathogenicity, the ChIRP-MS data provides an orthogonal but complementary resource to existing
protein-protein interaction and phenotypic CRISPR screening studies ​(Gordon et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2020)​. In particular, we find that the vRNA:host protein interface is largely
distinct from that of viral and host proteins and nominates roles for previously unappreciated biological
processes in SARS-CoV-2 infection. Our data also reveal unexpected aspects of virally encoded proteins. For
example, many of the predicted viral RBPs were robustly captured by ChIRP in VeroE6 cells (e.g. nsp12 and
nsp13); however, these were not enriched during infection in Huh7.5 cells. These cell type or species-specific
associations could provide insights into differential virus susceptibility phenotypes, such as high viral titer and
rapid cytotoxicity observed in VeroE6 cells, compared to Huh7.5 cells.
Comparisons of SARS-CoV-2 ChIRP-MS data to ChIRP-MS of three other positive-sense RNA viruses,
and to genome-wide CRISPR screens, provided several new insights into the ‘molecular arms race’ that takes
place between the virus and host. First, this analysis identified shared and unique strategies employed by
viruses to hijack the host for trafficking and replication. For example, SARS-CoV-2 and flavivirus vRNAs both
associate with the Rab GTPase proteins, RAB10 and RAB2A, which are involved in subcellular trafficking, and
CRISPR perturbation revealed that these proteins are required for viral replication and virus-induced cell death
(Gordon et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2020)​. In contrast, despite the fact that both viral families depend on
glycoproteins to produce infectious virions, there was a limited association of SARS-CoV-2 vRNA with the
translational apparatus and the Sec/Translocon/OST complexes, compared to flaviviruses ​(Ooi et al., 2019)​.
These data suggest that while both form membrane-enclosed replication complexes, flaviviruses may
physically leverage the translocon complex, while SARS-CoV-2 leverages other domains of the ERGIC.
Second, an unexpected finding from the intersection of ChIRP-MS and CRISPR datasets was that the vast
majority (116/138) of vRNA-binding proteins were host-protective, rather than pro-viral factors. Most of these
factors were commonly bound to multiple viral families, but we also found 31 SARS-CoV-2-specific factors.
These results demonstrate that host cells deploy a broad and diverse array of proteins to physically recognize
and counteract viral infection, and that these proteins are not limited to those with well-characterized viral
recognition function, such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs), but also extend to
many other protein families with RNA-binding capacity. It is important to note that in this study, we relied on cell
death-based CRISPR screens to assign functionality to vRNA-binding factors, but future screens focused on
other aspects of the viral life cycle may identify additional functional aspects of these factors.
Finally, we identified a functional connection between SARS-CoV-2 vRNA and the mitochondria. Both
RNA and protein components of the mitochondria were robustly captured with the SARS-CoV-2 vRNA in
VeroE6 and Huh7.5 cells, suggesting a close physical interaction, and electron microscopy demonstrated
changes in mitochondrial shape and size after infection. Interestingly, other viruses, including HIV have also
been reported to physically enter the mitochondria, providing evidence that vRNA can gain access to the
mitochondria during infection ​(Somasundaran et al., 1994)​. ​M​itochondria are central to the underlying health of
a cell, play an active role in sensing and signaling during cellular stress and act as a hub for innate immune
signaling. Indeed, we found that functional CRISPR perturbations of mitochondrial proteins revealed that many
of these proteins were required for host survival. Based on our results, we propose that RNA viruses may
follow a distinct logic when causing mitochondrial stress; that is, many viruses may interact with and perturb
this organelle, but the precise manner in which stress is caused, and thus signaling occurs, is virus-specific.
Along these lines, one of the top virus-specific hits in the Huh7.5 ChIRP-MS data was MRM2/FTSJ2, a
mitochondrial localized 2'-O-methyltransferase. This is of particular interest due to the previous identification
and characterization of FTSJ3/SPB1 as a factor that methylates the HIV RNA genome, which leads to pro-viral
shielding of the HIV RNA from MDA5 recognition ​(Ringeard et al., 2019)​. Thus, while additional work is needed
to define the mechanism of action of MRM2 in the context of SARS-CoV-2 infection, we hypothesize that it

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

may play a pro-viral role. Altogether, this study provides an unbiased and comprehensive catalogue of
functional SARS-CoV-2 RNA-host protein interactions, revealed a functional link between SARS-CoV-2 and
the mitochondria, and may inform future studies to understand the mechanisms of viral pathogenesis and
nominate strategies to combat the virus for therapeutic benefit.
Figure Legends
Figure 1: ChIRP-MS identifies host and viral proteins associated with the SARS-CoV-2 RNA genome in
infected cells.
(A) Schematic of the ChIRP-MS protocol. ​(B) SDS-PAGE analysis of total protein samples enriched using
SARS-CoV-2 targeting biotinylated oligonucleotides from Mock (uninfected) cells or cells infected for 24 or 48
hours with SARS-CoV-2 in both Huh7.5 (top) and VeroE6 (bottom) cells. ​(C) Quantification of the percentage
of reads mapping to SARS-CoV-2 gRNA (ORF1a/b) versus the subgenomic RNA (sgRNA) before and after
pulldown. ​(D) RNA-seq coverage of the SARS-CoV-2 genome before and after pulldown. ​(E) Structure of the
SARS-CoV-2 genome. ​(F)​ Enrichment of each viral protein in Huh7.5 and VeroE6 cells at both time points.
Figure 2:​ ​Changes in the SARS-CoV-2 associated proteome across time points and species.
(A) Significantly enriched proteins in Vero cells after viral RNA pulldown at 24 and 48 h.p.i. ​(B) Significantly
enriched proteins in Huh7.5 cells after viral RNA pulldown at 24 and 48 h.p.i. ​(C) Conservation of enriched
proteins between time points (left, middle) and species (right). ​(D) Cytoscape network representation of the
SARS-CoV-2 associated human proteome. Colors indicate ChIRP enrichment in Huh7.5 cells 48 h.p.i.
Figure 3: Comparison of the SARS-CoV-2 associated proteome to that of other RNA viruses.
(A) Principal component analysis of ChIRP enrichments in human cells across time points and viruses. ​(B)
Upset plot comparing expanded interactomes of SARS-CoV-2, ZIKV, DENV, and RV in human cells at 48 h.p.i.
(C) Top: Cellular Components GO terms enriched in the expanded interactome of each virus. Bottom: Binding
Protein GO terms enriched in the expanded interactome of each virus. ​(D) ​Comparison of proteasome subunits
and proteasome accessory factor associations across viruses.
Figure 4: Cellular context of expanded interactomes across viruses. Selected groups of proteins, their
enrichment in SARS-CoV-2, Zika, Dengue, and Rhinovirus ChIRP, and their approximate subcellular
localization. Heat map colors indicate the log​2 ChIRP-MS enrichment values. Each heatmap has a separate
scale bar.
Figure 5: ​Integration of ChIRP-MS and functional genomic data suggest novel pro- and anti-viral host
factors.
(A) High confidence SARS-CoV-2 interactome overlaid on VeroE6 CRISPR screen data. ​(B) Expanded
SARS-CoV-2 interactome overlaid on CRISPR screen data. ​(C) Comparison of CRISPR guide RNA (sgRNA)
residuals for significant hits (fdr <= 0.05) of all genes (left, black), genes present in the high-confidence
SARS-CoV-2 RNA interactome (purple, middle), or genes present in the expanded SARS-CoV-2 RNA
interactome (right, blue). P values computed from Mann-Whitney test. (D) High confidence SARS-CoV-2
human interactome network colored by enrichment or depletion in CRISPR screen. ​(E) sgRNA residuals for
CRISPR hits identified in (B) grouped by cellular pathways in Figure 4. Individual CRISPR guides are
represented by black lines. The average of these is shown in red. ​(F) Inter-virus comparison of shared
ChIRP-MS / CRISPR hits identified in (A). ​(G) ​sgRNA residuals for top 20 sensitizing hits (left) and for all
significant resistance hits (right) identified in (B).
Figure 6: SARS-CoV-2 associated proteins and RNAs nominate the mitochondria in viral pathogenesis.
(A) Enriched host RNAs after vRNA pulldown in VeroE6 cell line 48 h.p.i. ​(B) Enriched host RNAs after vRNA

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

pulldown in Huh7.5 cell line 48 h.p.i. ​(C) Electron microscopy (EM) of HBEC cells uninfected (left, Mock) or
infected by SARS-CoV-2 (right). Selected mitochondria indicated with arrowheads in the inset. ​(D)
Quantification of mitochondria size by EM in five ciliated (infected) cells. ​(E) Mitochondrial proteins which are
present in the expanded interactome of at least one virus and their conservation across viruses. Segments of
the circle, from smallest to largest, correspond to proteins encoded by the mitochondrial genome, components
of the mitochondrial ribosome, and proteins encoded by the nuclear genome which are localized or associated
with the mitochondria. Enrichment (log​2 FC) scale is capped at 2. Proteins which are significant hits in the
CRISPR screen data in Figure 5 are indicated with red labels. ​(F) CRISPR sgRNA residuals for mitochondrially
annotated CRISPR hits labeled in red in E.
Supplementary Figure Legends
Figure S1, related to Figure 1
(A) Host and viral RNA-seq alignment statistics for all samples across Huh7.5 (left) and VeroE6 (right) cell
lines.
Figure S2, related to Figure 2
(A) ​High confidence SARS-CoV-2 human interactome network colored by time point (24 h.p.i., 48 h.p.i., or
both). ​(B)​ High confidence SARS-CoV-2 human interactome network colored by species conservation.
Figure S3, related to Figure 2
(A) Comparison of the high confidence SARS-CoV-2 RNA associated human proteome by RAP-MS (UV
crosslinking) to that by formaldehyde crosslinking (ChIRP-MS) and comparison of the SARS-CoV-2 RNA
associated proteome to the SARS-CoV-2 protein associated proteome (PPI). ​(B) Overlap of interactomes by
RAP-MS and ChIRP-MS. ​(C)​ Overlap of interactomes by PPI and ChIRP-MS.
Figure S4, related to Figure 4
(A)​ Pan-viral comparison of associations with translation initiation (EIF) factors.
Figure S5, related to Figure 5
(A) CRISPR guide residuals for SWI/SNF related genes enriched in the ChIRP-MS dataset. ​(B) All genes
which are significant hits in the CRISPR screen (fdr ≤ 0.05) and also present in the high confidence
interactome (smaller segment) or the expanded interactome (larger segment) of SARS-CoV-2 and their
association with other viruses. Scale is capped at 5.
Figure S6, related to Figure 6
(A) Conservation between time points of SARS-associated host RNAs in the VeroE6 cell line. ​(B) Conservation
between time points of SARS-associated host RNAs in Huh7.5 cell line. ​(C) ChIRP-MS enrichment of rRNA
2’-O-ribose methyltransferases across viruses.
Table Descriptions
Table S1: ​Sequences of 108 biotinylated ChIRP probes.
Table S2: ​Mass spectrometry ​data for viral proteins and host proteins with mean enrichment ≥ 1 in
SARS-CoV-2 ChIRP-MS datasets.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Table S3: ​Full data for all proteins in all datasets including pan-virus data, high confidence interactomes,
expanded interactomes, CRISPR screen results, and presence in other datasets (such as UV-crosslinking
data, PPI data).
Methods
Cell lines, SARS-CoV-2 infection, and cell processing
Vero-E6 and Huh7.5 cells were seeded at 1x10​6 cells per T150 flask and were grown in Dulbecco’s Modified
Eagle Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), and 1%
Penicillin/Streptomycin. Three T150 flasks were assigned per condition: 0, 1, and 2 days post-infection (dpi).
The next day, the media was removed, and cells were inoculated with SARS-CoV-2 isolate USA-WA1/2020
(BEI Resources #NR-48814) at MOI of 0.01. Flasks were incubated at 37°C for 1 hr with gentle rocking every
15 min. At 0, 1, and 2 dpi, supernatant from the flasks were discarded, and cells were washed with 1X PBS
twice. 4 mL of 4% of paraformaldehyde was added on each of the flasks and incubated for 30 min at room
temperature. Afterwards, cells were quenched with 250 µL of 2 M glycine (final concentration of 125 mM) for
each flask. Cells were scraped, harvested in pre-weighed microcentrifuge tubes, and span at 1000 x g for 5
min at 4°C. All supernatants aspirated, and the final pellet were weighed. Cells were frozen at -80°C until used.
All procedures with infectious virus were done at a Biosafety Level 3 (BSL3) laboratory and approved by the
Yale University Biosafety Committee.
Comprehensive identification of RNA binding proteins by mass spectrometry (ChIRP-MS)
SARS-CoV-2 targeting probes were designed online (https://www.biosearchtech.com/stellaris), with repeat
masking setting of 3 and even coverage of the whole transcript. Full probe sequences available in ​Table S1​.
Oligos were synthesized with a 3′ biotin-TEG modification at Stanford Protein and Nucleic Acid Facility
(panoligo@stanford.edu).
ChIRP-MS was performed largely as described in ​(Chu et al., 2015)​. Cells were cultured, infected, and
crosslinked as described above in the BSL3 facility. Lysate was generated by resuspending cell pellets in 1 mL
lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.0, 10 mM EDTA, 1% SDS) per 100 mg of cell pellet weight (~100µL pellet
volume). Lysates were sonicated using a focused-ultrasonicator (Covaris, E220) until the average RNA length
was ~500 nucleotides as determined by agarose gel analysis and stored at -80°C. Stored lysates were thawed
on ice and prepared for pre-clearing. Precleared was achieved by adding 30 μL washed MyOne C1 beads per
mL of lysate at 37°C for 30 minutes on rotation. Preclearing beads were removed twice from lysate using a
magnetic stand; for this and all subsequent magnetic stand steps allow for > 1 minutes of separation before
removing any supernatant. Next, for every 1 mL of sonicated lysate 2 mL of ChIRP hybridization buffer (750
mM NaCl, 1% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.0, 1 mM EDTA, 15% formamide; made fresh) and 2.5 µL of 100 µM
ChIRP Probe Pools were added per mL of lysate. ChIRP Probe Pools (​Table S1​) were composed of an
equimolar mix of 108 antisense oligos. For each biological triplicate, a total of 7 mL of sonicated cell lysate was
used. Hybridization took place on rotation for 16 hours at 37°C. Subsequently, 250 µL of washed MyOne C1
beads per mL of lysate were added to each sample and incubated on rotation for 45 minutes at 37°C. Enriched
material was collected on the beads with a magnetic stand, and beads were washed 5x 2 minutes in 1 mL of
ChIRP Wash Buffer (2x NaCl-Sodium Citrate (SSC, ThermoFisher Scientific), 0.5% SDS) at 37°C. After
washing, 1% of each sample was saved for RNA extraction and RNA-seq library preparation (below). To elute
enriched proteins, beads were collected on magnetic stand, resuspended in ChIRP biotin elution buffer (12.5
mM biotin, 7.5 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 75 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM EDTA, 0.15% SDS, 0.075% sarkosyl, and 0.02%
Na-Deoxycholate), mixed at 25°C for 20 minutes on rotation and at 65°C for 15 minutes shaking. Eluent was
transferred to a fresh tube, and beads were eluted again. The two eluents were pooled (~1200 µL), and
residual beads were removed again using the magnetic stand. 25% total volume (300 µL) trichloroacetic acid
was added to the clean eluent, vortexed, and then samples were placed at 4°C overnight for precipitation. The
next day, proteins were pelleted at 21,000 rcf at 4°C for 60 minutes. Supernatant was carefully removed and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

protein pellets were washed once with ice-cold acetone. Samples were spun at 21,000 rcf at 4°C for 5 minutes.
Acetone supernatant was removed, tubes briefly centrifuged again and, after removal of residual acetone,
were left to air-dry on the bench-top. Proteins were then solubilized in 1x LDS Buffer in NT2 with 20 mM DTT
and boiled at 95°C for 30 minutes with occasional mixing for reverse-crosslinking.
Protein samples were size-separated on bis-tris SDS-PAGE gels (Bio-Rad), and the gel was fixed and stained
with the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Each
ChIRP-MS experiment (1 lane in the gel) was cut into 2 slices from the SDS-PAGE and prepared
independently. Gel slices were prepared for mass spectrometry by rinsing sequentially in 200 µL HPLC-grade
water, 100% Acetonitrile (ACN, ThermoFisher Scientific), 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (AmBic). Samples
were reduced by adding 200 µL of 5 mM DTT in 50 mM AmBic and incubating at 65°C for 35 minutes. The
reduction buffer was discarded, and samples were cooled to room temperature. Alkylation was achieved by
adding 200 µL of 25 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM AmBic for 20 minutes at 25°C in the dark. The alkylation
buffer was discarded, samples were rinsed once in 200 µL 50 mM AmBic, and then they were washed twice for
10 minutes each in 200 µL of freshly prepared 50% ACN in 50 mM AmBic. After each wash, the supernatant
was discarded, and after all washes, samples were dried for 3 hours using a SpeedVac. Once dry, proteins
were digested by adding 100 ng of trypsin in 200 µL of 50 mM AmBic for 16 hours at 37°C. Samples were
subsequently acidified by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 1% and incubating at 37°C for 45
minutes. Finally, samples were desalted using HyperSep Filter Plates with a 5-7 µL bed volume (ThermoFisher
Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were eluted twice in 100 µL 80% ACN in 0.2%
formic acid, dried on a SpeedVac, and resuspended in 10 µL 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis.
All samples were resuspended in 10 μL 0.2% formic acid in water and 4 μL were injected on column for each
sample. Peptides were separated over a 50 cm EasySpray reversed phase LC column (75 µm inner diameter
packed with 2 μm, 100 Å, PepMap C18 particles, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phases (A: water with
0.2% formic acid and B: acetonitrile with 0.2% formic acid) were driven and controlled by a Dionex Ultimate
3000 RPLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An integrated loading pump was used to load peptides
onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 5 um particles, 20 mm length, ThermoFisher) at 5 µL/min,
which was put in line with the analytical column 6 minutes into the gradient for the total protein samples.
Gradient elution was performed at 300 nL/min. The gradient increased from 0% to 5% B over the first 6
minutes of the analysis, followed by an increase from 5% to 25% B from 6 to 86 minutes, an increase from
25% to 90% B from 86 to 94 minutes, isocratic flow at 90% B from 94 to 102 minutes, and a re-equilibration at
0% for 18 minutes for a total analysis time of 120 minutes. Precursors were ionized using an EASY-Spray
ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) source held at +2.2 kV compared to ground, and the column was
held at 45 °C. The inlet capillary temperature was held at 275 °C, and the RF lens was held at 60%. Survey
scans of peptide precursors were collected in the Orbitrap from 350-1350 Th with an AGC target of 1,000,000,
a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. Monoisotopic precursor selection
was enabled for peptide isotopic distributions, precursors of z = 2-5 were selected for data-dependent MS/MS
scans for 2 seconds of cycle time, and dynamic exclusion was set to 45 seconds with a ±10 ppm window set
around the precursor monoisotope. An isolation window of 1 Th was used to select precursor ions with the
quadrupole. MS/MS scans were collected using HCD at 30 normalized collision energy (nce) with an AGC
target of 50,000 and a maximum injection time of 54 ms. Mass analysis was performed in the Orbitrap with a
resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z and an automatically determined mass range.
FASTA sequences of the human proteome (Uniprot: UP000005640) were used and FASTA sequences of the
viral proteins from SARS-CoV-2 (Uniprot: P0DTC1, P0DTD1, P0DTC2, P0DTC3, P0DTC4, P0DTC5, P0DTC6,
P0DTC7, P0DTD8, P0DTC8, P0DTC9, P0DTD2, P0DTD3, A0A663DJA2), DENV (Uniprot: A0A173DS53),
ZIKV (Uniprot: A0A140D2T1), RV (Uniprot: P03303) were appended to the end of the human proteome
reference file. For the VeroE6 reference: GreenMonkey (Chlorocebus sabaeus, Uniprot: UP000029965). This

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

concatenated file was used to search the ChIRP-MS data with MaxQuant with the following parameters:
semi-specific cleavage specificity at the C-terminal site of R and K allowing for 2 missed cleavages. Mass
tolerance was set at 12 ppm for MS1s, 0.4 for MS2s. Methionine oxidation, asparagine deamidation, and
N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed
modification. Label-free quantitation values from MaxQuant were imported into R for downstream analysis. To
define significantly enriched SARS-associated protein sets, R package `Differential Enrichment analysis of
Proteomics data` (DEP) was used. Filtering, normalization, and imputation were performed on MaxQuant
outputs using the DEP default workflow. Enriched protein sets were defined using cutoffs log2 fold change > 0
and adjusted p-value <= 0.05, comparing infected cells after SARS RNA pulldown to identically treated
uninfected (mock) cells.
ChIRP-RNA-seq and analysis
Input lysate samples and enriched RNA samples (1% of the ChIRP sample) were first digested of their cellular
proteins which also acts to effectively reverse the formaldehyde crosslinking. RNA samples were brought to 50
μL with 1x PBS and 5uL Proteinase K (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubated at 55C for 30 minutes. RNA
was cleaned using the Zymo Clean and Concentrate 5 column (Zymo Research) and eluted in 2x 20 μL (final
40 μL). DNA was removed by adding 2 μL DNaseI and 5 μL 10x DNase buffer (NEB) to the purified RNA and
incubated at 37C for 30 minutes. The RNA was cleaned up as above with the Zymo Clean and Concentrate 5
column but eluted 2x 10 μL (final 20 μL). To construct RNA seq libraries, TAKARA Bio SMART-Seq Stranded
Kit User Manual (TAKARA Bio) was used with the following modifications. Up to 5 ng RNA was
reverse-transcribed and amplified by PCR following the SMART-seq protocol. To increase cDNA yield and
detection efficiency, we started from first-strand cDNA synthesis without fragmentation. The number of PCR1
cycles was 5. We purified the cDNA product with 50 μL AMPure beads (1:1 ratio) and eluted into 20 μL water.
Then the 20 μL purified cDNA was used as input for the final RNA-Seq library amplification. To reduce the
amount of primer dimer artifacts, we purified the RNA-Seq library with 90 μL AMPure beads (x0.9 selection)
and eluted into 20 μL water. Sequencing was performed using the Nextseq 500/550 Sequencing system
(Illumina) with 2 x 75 bp paired-end reads and 2 x 8 bp index reads.
Adapters were automatically detected and trimmed using fastp​5​. Host genomes (for homo sapiens and
chlorocebus sabaeus) were obtained from Ensembl along with annotation (gtf) files for use with feature counts.
The SARS-CoV-2 genome was obtained from NCBI. Hisat2 was used to index all genomes and align reads​6​.
Fastq files were initially aligned to a file of known “repeat” sequences--specific sequences which are present in
multiple locations in the genome and which can cause a high percentage of multi-mapped reads. Remaining
reads were then aligned to the SARS-CoV-2 genome. SARS-CoV-2 genome coverage was visualized in the
Integrative Genomics Viewer to assess pulldown efficiency. Remaining reads were then aligned to the host
genome and reads overlapping genomic features (genes) were quantified using the featureCounts command
line utility​7​. Aggregated counts matrices were loaded into DESeq2 for normalization and differential gene
expression analysis​8​. For GO term analysis, expanded interactomes of each virus were annotated with the
DAVID Bioinformatics Resource ​(Huang et al., 2009a, 2009b)​. Annotations for Cellular Components, Binding
Proteins, and Protein Domains were used to compute enrichments for each expanded interactome.
Electron Microscopy
Samples were from Wei et al. 2020 and prepared in the following way: HBECs were fixed using 2.5%
glutaraldehyde in 0.1M phosphate buffer, osmicated in 1% osmium tetroxide, and dehydrated in ethanol.
During dehydration, 1% uranyl acetate was added to the 70% ethanol to enhance ultrastructural membrane
contrast. After dehydration the cells were embedded in Durcupan and ultrathin sections were cut on a Leica
Ultra-Microtome, collected on Formvar-coated single-slot grids, and analyzed with a Tecnai 12 Biotwin electron
microscope (FEI). ImageJ software was used to measure mitochondrial area.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Acknowledgement
We thank Nicholas Riley for designing the Mass Spec methods and operating the instrument, Chris Richards
and Chris Lapointe for helpful discussions, John Doench, Ruth Hanna, and Peter DeWeirdt for assistance
analyzing CRISPR data, and Sigrid Knemeyer and Christine Shan at SciStories LLC for illustrations. This work
was supported by the National Institutes of Health grants ​K08CA230188 (A.T.S.), ​K08AI128043 (C.B.W.)​,
R01AI140186S (J.E.C), and R01AI141970 (J.E.C.), the ​Bu​rroughs Wellcome Fund Career Award for Medical
Scientists (R.A.F., A.T.S., C.B.W.), the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (A.T.S.), the Ludwig Family
Foundation (C.B.W.), a Stanford ChEM-H COVID-19 award (A.T.S.), and Fast Grants from Emergent Ventures
(A.T.S., C.B.W.). ​R.A.F. was supported by Damon Runyon Cancer Research Foundation DRG-2286-17​. ​J.A.B
and K.R.P. were supported by Stanford Graduate Fellowships. J.A.B. was supported by the National Science
Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-1656518. A.T.S. was supported by a Parker
Bridge Scholar Award from the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy and a Cancer Research Institute
Technology Impact Award. J.E.C. was supported by ​the Burroughs Wellcome Investigators in the
Pathogenesis of Infectious Disease Award. ​H.Y.C was supported by the Pershing Square Foundation and
RM1-HG007735. C.R.B. and H.Y.C. are Investigators of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. ​The sequencing
data was generated at the Stanford Functional Genomics Facility with instrumentation purchased with NIH
grants S10OD018220 and 1S10OD021763.
Author contributions:
R.A.F., M.R.M., C.B.W., and A.T.S. conceived the study. R.A.F., Y.Q., C.O.S. performed SARS-CoV-2 and
ChIRP experiments. R.A.F., J.A.B., A.L., K.R.P. performed analysis of ChIRP data. J.W., M.M.A., and C.B.W.
performed and analyzed CRISPR screens. Y.Y. and T.H. performed mitochondrial imaging experiments.
R.A.F., H.Y.C., T.H., J.E.C., C.R.B., C.B.W., and A.T.S. oversaw and guided experiments and analysis. R.A.F.,
J.A.B., C.B.W., and A.T.S. drafted the manuscript and all authors reviewed and provided comments on the
manuscript.
Declaration of interest
K.R.P., H.Y.C., and A.T.S. are co-founders of Cartography Biosciences. A.T.S. is a co-founder of Immunai and
receives research funding from Arsenal Biosciences, Sonoma Biotherapeutics, and Allogene Therapeutics.
H.Y.C. is a co-founder of Accent Therapeutics, Boundless Bio, and an advisor for 10x Genomics, Arsenal
Biosciences, and Spring Discovery. Yale University (C.B.W.) has a patent pending related to this work entitled:
“Compounds and Compositions for Treating, Ameliorating, and/or Preventing SARS-CoV-2 Infection and/or
Complications Thereof.” Yale University has committed to ​rapidly executable non-exclusive royalty-free
licenses to intellectual property rights for the purpose of making and distributing products to prevent, diagnose
and treat COVID-19 infection during the pandemic and for a short period thereafter.
References
Ahlquist, P. (2006). Parallels among positive-strand RNA viruses, reverse-transcribing viruses and
double-stranded RNA viruses. Nature Reviews Microbiology ​4​, 371–382.
Ayadi, L., Galvanin, A., Pichot, F., Marchand, V., and Motorin, Y. (2019). RNA ribose methylation
(2′-O-methylation): Occurrence, biosynthesis and biological functions. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) Gene Regulatory Mechanisms ​1862​, 253–269.
Capalbo, G., Mueller-Kuller, T., Koschmieder, S., Klein, H.-U., Ottmann, O.G., Hoelzer, D., and Scheuring, U.J.
(2013). Characterization of ZC3H15 as a potential TRAF-2-interacting protein implicated in the NFκB pathway

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

and overexpressed in AML. International Journal of Oncology ​43​, 246–254.
Carrasco-Hernandez, R., Jácome, R., López Vidal, Y., and Ponce de León, S. (2017). Are RNA Viruses
Candidate Agents for the Next Global Pandemic? A Review. ILAR J ​58​, 343–358.
Chang, C., Hou, M.-H., Chang, C.-F., Hsiao, C.-D., and Huang, T. (2014). The SARS coronavirus nucleocapsid
protein – Forms and functions. Antiviral Research ​103​, 39–50.
Chen, Y., Sharma, S., Assis, P.A., Jiang, Z., Elling, R., Olive, A.J., Hang, S., Bernier, J., Huh, J.R., Sassetti,
C.M., et al. (2018). CNBP controls IL-12 gene transcription and Th1 immunity. J. Exp. Med. ​215​, 3136–3150.
Chu, C., and Chang, H.Y. (2018). ChIRP-MS: RNA-Directed Proteomic Discovery. Methods Mol. Biol. ​1861,​
37–45.
Chu, C., Zhang, Q.C., da Rocha, S.T., Flynn, R.A., Bharadwaj, M., Calabrese, J.M., Magnuson, T., Heard, E.,
and Chang, H.Y. (2015). Systematic Discovery of Xist RNA Binding Proteins. Cell.
Cockrell, A.S., Leist, S.R., Douglas, M.G., and Baric, R.S. (2018). Modeling pathogenesis of emergent and
pre-emergent human coronaviruses in mice. Mamm. Genome ​29​, 367–383.
Dimitrova, D.G., Teysset, L., and Carré, C. (2019). RNA 2′-O-Methylation (Nm) Modification in Human
Diseases. Genes (Basel) ​10​.
Eckhardt, M., Hultquist, J.F., Kaake, R.M., Hüttenhain, R., and Krogan, N.J. (2020). A systems approach to
infectious disease. Nature Reviews Genetics ​21​, 339–354.
Edgil, D., Polacek, C., and Harris, E. (2006). Dengue virus utilizes a novel strategy for translation initiation
when cap-dependent translation is inhibited. J. Virol. ​80​, 2976–2986.
Fernandez-Garcia, M.-D., Mazzon, M., Jacobs, M., and Amara, A. (2009). Pathogenesis of flavivirus infections:
using and abusing the host cell. Cell Host and Microbe ​5​, 318–328.
Finkel, Y., Mizrahi, O., Nachshon, A., Weingarten-Gabbay, S., Morgenstern, D., Yahalom-Ronen, Y., Tamir, H.,
Achdout, H., Stein, D., Israeli, O., et al. (2020). The coding capacity of SARS-CoV-2. Nature.
Fritzlar, S., Aktepe, T.E., Chao, Y.-W., Kenney, N.D., McAllaster, M.R., Wilen, C.B., White, P.A., and
Mackenzie,
J.M. (2019). Mouse Norovirus Infection Arrests Host Cell Translation Uncoupled from the Stress
Granule-PKR-eIF2α Axis. MBio ​10​.
Garcia-Blanco, M.A., Vasudevan, S.G., Bradrick, S.S., and Nicchitta, C. (2016). Flavivirus RNA transactions
from viral entry to genome replication. Antiviral Research ​134​, 244–249.
Geuens, T., Bouhy, D., and Timmerman, V. (2016). The hnRNP family: insights into their role in health and
disease. Hum Genet ​135​, 851–867.
Glingston, R.S., Deb, R., Kumar, S., and Nagotu, S. (2019). Organelle dynamics and viral infections: at cross
roads. Microbes Infect ​21​, 20–32.
Gordon, D.E., Jang, G.M., Bouhaddou, M., Xu, J., Obernier, K., White, K.M., O’Meara, M.J., Rezelj, V.V., Guo,
J.Z., Swaney, D.L., et al. (2020). A SARS-CoV-2 protein interaction map reveals targets for drug repurposing.
Nature ​583​, 459–468.
Gralinski, L.E., and Baric, R.S. (2015). Molecular pathology of emerging coronavirus infections. J. Pathol. ​235​,
185–195.
Harcourt, J., Tamin, A., Lu, X., Kamili, S., Sakthivel, S.K., Murray, J., Queen, K., Tao, Y., Paden, C.R., Zhang,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

J., et al. (2020). Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 from Patient with Coronavirus Disease,
United States. Emerging Infect. Dis. ​26​, 1266–1273.
Hoffmann, H.-H., Schneider, W.M., Sánchez-Rivera, F.J., Luna, J.M., Ashbrook, A.W., Soto-Feliciano, Y.M.,
Leal, A.A., Pen, J.L., Ricardo-Lax, I., Michailidis, E., et al. (2020). Functional interrogation of a SARS-CoV-2
host protein interactome identifies unique and shared coronavirus host factors. BioRxiv 2020.09.11.291716.
Hosmillo, M., Lu, J., McAllaster, M.R., Eaglesham, J.B., Wang, X., Emmott, E., Domingues, P., Chaudhry, Y.,
Fitzmaurice, T.J., Tung, M.K., et al. (2019). Noroviruses subvert the core stress granule component G3BP1 to
promote viral VPg-dependent translation. Elife ​8​.
Huang, D.W., Sherman, B.T., and Lempicki, R.A. (2009a). Bioinformatics enrichment tools: paths toward the
comprehensive functional analysis of large gene lists. Nucleic Acids Res. ​37​, 1–13.
Huang, D.W., Sherman, B.T., and Lempicki, R.A. (2009b). Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene
lists using DAVID bioinformatics resources. Nature Protocols ​4​, 44–57.
Jankowsky, E. (2011). RNA Helicases at work: binding and rearranging. Trends Biochem Sci ​36​, 19–29.
Kim, B., Arcos, S., Rothamel, K., and Ascano, M. (2020a). Viral cross-linking and solid-phase purification
enables discovery of ribonucleoprotein complexes on incoming RNA virus genomes (Immunology).
Kim, D., Lee, J.-Y., Yang, J.-S., Kim, J.W., Kim, V.N., and Chang, H. (2020b). The Architecture of
SARS-CoV-2
Transcriptome. Cell S0092867420304062.
Lahaye, X., Gentili, M., Silvin, A., Conrad, C., Picard, L., Jouve, M., Zueva, E., Maurin, M., Nadalin, F., Knott,
G.J., et al. (2018). NONO Detects the Nuclear HIV Capsid to Promote cGAS-Mediated Innate Immune
Activation. Cell ​175​, 488-501.e22.
Lenarcic, E.M., Landry, D.M., Greco, T.M., Cristea, I.M., and Thompson, S.R. (2013). Thiouracil cross-linking
mass spectrometry: a cell-based method to identify host factors involved in viral amplification. J. Virol. ​87​,
8697–8712.
Li, M., Ramage, H., and Cherry, S. (2020). Deciphering flavivirus–host interactions using quantitative
proteomics. Current Opinion in Immunology ​66​, 90–97.
Lichinchi, G., Zhao, B.S., Wu, Y., Lu, Z., Qin, Y., He, C., and Rana, T.M. (2016). Dynamics of Human and Viral
RNA Methylation during Zika Virus Infection. Cell Host and Microbe ​20​, 666–673.
McBride, C.E., Li, J., and Machamer, C.E. (2007). The cytoplasmic tail of the severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus spike protein contains a novel endoplasmic reticulum retrieval signal that binds COPI
and promotes interaction with membrane protein. J. Virol. ​81​, 2418–2428.
Meier-Stephenson, V., Mrozowich, T., Pham, M., and Patel, T.R. (2018). DEAD-box helicases: the Yin and
Yang roles in viral infections. Biotechnol. Genet. Eng. Rev. ​34,​ 3–32.
Menachery, V.D., Yount, B.L., Debbink, K., Agnihothram, S., Gralinski, L.E., Plante, J.A., Graham, R.L.,
Scobey, T., Ge, X.-Y., Donaldson, E.F., et al. (2015). A SARS-like cluster of circulating bat coronaviruses
shows potential for human emergence. Nat. Med. ​21​, 1508–1513.
Mukhopadhyay, S., Kuhn, R.J., and Rossmann, M.G. (2005). A structural perspective of the flavivirus life cycle.
Nat Rev Microbiol ​3​, 13–22.
Ooi, Y.S., Majzoub, K., Flynn, R.A., Mata, M.A., Diep, J., Li, J.K., van Buuren, N., Rumachik, N., Johnson,
A.G., Puschnik, A.S., et al. (2019). An RNA-centric dissection of host complexes controlling flavivirus infection.
Nat Microbiol.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Oppikofer, M., Bai, T., Gan, Y., Haley, B., Liu, P., Sandoval, W., Ciferri, C., and Cochran, A. (2017). Expansion
of the ISWI chromatin remodeler family with new active complexes. EMBO Rep ​18​, 1697–1706.
Ou, S.H., Wu, F., Harrich, D., García-Martínez, L.F., and Gaynor, R.B. (1995). Cloning and characterization of
a novel cellular protein, TDP-43, that binds to human immunodeficiency virus type 1 TAR DNA sequence
motifs. J Virol ​69​, 3584–3596.
Phillips, S.L., Soderblom, E.J., Bradrick, S.S., and Garcia-Blanco, M.A. (2016). Identification of Proteins Bound
to Dengue Viral RNA In Vivo Reveals New Host Proteins Important for Virus Replication. MBio ​7​,
e01865-01815.
Puschnik, A.S., Majzoub, K., Ooi, Y.S., and Carette, J.E. (2017). A CRISPR toolbox to study virus-host
interactions. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. ​15​, 351–364.
Raaben, M., Posthuma, C.C., Verheije, M.H., Lintelo, E.G. te, Kikkert, M., Drijfhout, J.W., Snijder, E.J., Rottier,
P.J.M., and Haan, C.A.M. de (2010). The Ubiquitin-Proteasome System Plays an Important Role during
Various Stages of the Coronavirus Infection Cycle. Journal of Virology ​84​, 7869–7879.
Ringeard, M., Marchand, V., Decroly, E., Motorin, Y., and Bennasser, Y. (2019). FTSJ3 is an RNA
2’-O-methyltransferase recruited by HIV to avoid innate immune sensing. Nature ​565,​ 500–504.
Roth, H., Magg, V., Uch, F., Mutz, P., Klein, P., Haneke, K., Lohmann, V., Bartenschlager, R., Fackler, O.T.,
Locker, N., et al. (2017). Flavivirus Infection Uncouples Translation Suppression from Cellular Stress
Responses. MBio ​8​.
Schmidt, N., Lareau, C.A., Keshishian, H., Melanson, R., Zimmer, M., Kirschner, L., Ade, J., Werner, S.,
Caliskan, N., Lander, E.S., et al. (2020). A direct RNA-protein interaction atlas of the SARS-CoV-2 RNA in
infected human cells. BioRxiv 2020.07.15.204404.
Schoggins, J.W., and Rice, C.M. (2011). Interferon-stimulated genes and their antiviral effector functions. Curr
Opin Virol ​1​, 519–525.
Schubert, K., Karousis, E.D., Jomaa, A., Scaiola, A., Echeverria, B., Gurzeler, L.-A., Leibundgut, M., Thiel, V.,
Mühlemann, O., and Ban, N. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 Nsp1 binds the ribosomal mRNA channel to inhibit
translation. Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 1–8.
Shannon, P., Markiel, A., Ozier, O., Baliga, N.S., Wang, J.T., Ramage, D., Amin, N., Schwikowski, B., and
Ideker, T. (2003). Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction
networks. Genome Research ​13​, 2498–2504.
Somasundaran, M., Zapp, M., Beattie, L., Pang, L., Byron, K., Bassell, G.J., Sullivan, Jo., and Singer, R.H.
(1994). Localization of HIV RNA in mitochondria of infected cells: potential role in cytopathogenicity. J Cell Biol
126​, 1353–1360.
Szul, T., and Sztul, E. (2011). COPII and COPI Traffic at the ER-Golgi Interface. Physiology ​26​, 348–364.
Taschuk, F., and Cherry, S. (2020). DEAD-Box Helicases: Sensors, Regulators, and Effectors for Antiviral
Defense. Viruses ​12​.
Thoms, M., Buschauer, R., Ameismeier, M., Koepke, L., Denk, T., Hirschenberger, M., Kratzat, H., Hayn, M.,
Mackens-Kiani, T., Cheng, J., et al. (2020). Structural basis for translational shutdown and immune evasion by
the Nsp1 protein of SARS-CoV-2. Science ​369​, 1249–1255.
Viktorovskaya, O.V., Greco, T.M., Cristea, I.M., and Thompson, S.R. (2016). Identification of RNA Binding
Proteins Associated with Dengue Virus RNA in Infected Cells Reveals Temporally Distinct Host Factor

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Requirements. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases ​10​, e0004921.
Wang, R., Simoneau, C.R., Kulsuptrakul, J., Bouhaddou, M., Travisano, K., Hayashi, J.M., Carlson-Stevermer,
J., Oki, J., Holden, K., Krogan, N.J., et al. (2020). Functional genomic screens identify human host factors for
SARS-CoV-2 and common cold coronaviruses. BioRxiv 2020.09.24.312298.
Wei, J., Alfajaro, M.M., Hanna, R.E., DeWeirdt, P.C., Strine, M.S., Lu-Culligan, W.J., Zhang, S.-M., Graziano,
V.R., Schmitz, C.O., Chen, J.S., et al. (2020). Genome-wide CRISPR screen reveals host genes that regulate
SARS-CoV-2 infection. BioRxiv: The Preprint Server for Biology.
Wolff, G., Limpens, R.W.A.L., Zevenhoven-Dobbe, J.C., Laugks, U., Zheng, S., de Jong, A.W.M., Koning, R.I.,
Agard, D.A., Grünewald, K., Koster, A.J., et al. (2020). A molecular pore spans the double membrane of the
coronavirus replication organelle. Science eabd3629.
Wu, K.E., Fazal, F.M., Parker, K.R., Zou, J., and Chang, H.Y. (2020). RNA-GPS Predicts SARS-CoV-2 RNA
Residency to Host Mitochondria and Nucleolus. Cell Syst ​11​, 102-108.e3.
Yue, Y., Liu, J., and He, C. (2015). RNA N6-methyladenosine methylation in post-transcriptional gene
expression regulation. Genes Dev ​29​, 1343–1355.
Zaccara, S., Ries, R.J., and Jaffrey, S.R. (2019). Reading, writing and erasing mRNA methylation. Nature
Reviews Molecular Cell Biology ​20​, 608–624.
Zhou, P., Yang, X.-L., Wang, X.-G., Hu, B., Zhang, L., Zhang, W., Si, H.-R., Zhu, Y., Li, B., Huang, C.-L., et al.
(2020). A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature ​579​, 270–273.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

A

SARS-CoV-2
(USA-WA1/2020)

D

Huh7.5

E

VeroE6

F
0

Input-seq ChIRP-seq Input-seq ChIRP-seq

5.0e
human cells
(Huh7.5)

4

1.3e

6

2.3e

5

1.7e

6

5’ <> n-term

nsp1
nsp2

monkey cells
(VeroE6)

PLpro

24hr vs 48hr
infection

nsp3

nsp4
3CLp

formaldehyde X-link
+ sonication
+ tiling oligo capture
+ streptavidin capture

nsp5
nsp6
nsp7
nsp8

B
kDa
260
160
125
90
70
50
38
25

1

Proteinase K

SDS-PAGE

RNA-seq

LC-MS/MS for IDs

Mock
2 3

Dye front

0.75

fraction of reads

VeroE6
Dye front
Total Protein Stain

Huh7.5
1.00

0.50

0.25

0.00

CoV-2, 48hr Cell Condition
1 2 3
BioRep #

RdRp

nsp12

helicase

nsp13

ExoN--N7
MTase

nsp14

NendoU

nsp15

2’O-MTase

nsp16

Huh7.5

260
160
125
90
70
50
38
25

C

CoV-2, 24hr
1 2 3

nsp9
nsp10

VeroE6

Input-seq ChIRP-seq Input-seq ChIRP-seq

S

ORF1ab
sgRNA

3a
3b
6
7a
7b
8
9b
9c
10
3’ <> c-term

E
M

N

Figure 1

ChIRP-MS Enrichment
log2(SARS-CoV-2/Mock)

4

8

12

16

Huh7.5 + 24hrs CoV-2
Huh7.5 + 48hrs CoV-2
VeroE6 + 24hrs CoV-2
VeroE6 + 48hrs CoV-2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

A

VeroE6

24 h.p.i.

P-value (-log10)

6

2

0

5

10

ANXA1
ELAVL1
A0A0D9RTU4
A0A0D9S3H8
hnRNP-A1
ZNF638

4

2

Host Protein
Viral Protein

0
−5

48 h.p.i.

6

KHSRP
A0A0D9RKW3
A0A0D9RTU4
SAFB
TRA2B
IGF2BP3
RALY
TAF15
A0A0D9S8N2

KHDRBS1
ZNF638
ELAVL1
A0A0D9S3H8
ANXA1

4

Figure 2

B

Huh7.5

24 h.p.i.

6

KHSRP
A0A0D9RKW3
KHDRBS1
IGF2BP3
SARS Mem
TRA2B
PRKDC
SAFB
PPP1CA

SARS−Mem
SARS Nucleocapsid
hnRNP-H1
IGF2BP1
ELAVL1
TARDBP
hnRNP-AB
DAZAP1
PTBP1
RPS4X
RBMX
MATR3
KHSRP

4

2

0
−5

0

5

10

SARS Nucleocapsid
MRM2
IGF2BP1
hnRNP-AB
PTBP1
RBMX
LSG1

SARS Mem
hnRNP-A3
hnRNP-H1
TIA1
ELAVL1

4

2

0

15

48 h.p.i.

6

0

15

−5

0

5

10

15

−5

0

5

10

15

ChIRP-MS Enrichment, log2(SARS-CoV-2/Mock)

C

115

170

Intersection Size
(# of proteins)

100

150
100

50

26

22

55

50

4

0

Huh7.5 24 h.p.i.

VeroE6 48 h.p.i.
100 50 0
Set Size

VeroE6 all

Huh7.5 48 h.p.i

Huh7.5 all

200 100 0
Set Size

A1CF

C1QBP

200 100 0
Set Size

hnRNPs

RNA binding proteins
CSDE1

CNBP

DAZAP1

FUS

FXR1

HMGB1

IGF2BP1

IGF2BP2

IGF2BP3

KHDRBS1

L1RE1

LIN28B

MATR3

MSI1

PA2G4

Helicases

SR proteins

HNRNPA0

HNRNPA1

HNRNPA3

HNRNPAB

HNRNPA2B1

DDX3X

DDX6

DDX5

HNRNPC

HNRNPD

HNRNPDL

PCBP1

PCBP2

DDX17

DDX39A

DDX19A

HNRNPF

HNRNPH1

HNRNPH3

HNRNPK

HNRNPL

DDX39B

DHX9

MOV10

HNRNPUL1

HNRNPM

80

50

0

VeroE6 24 h.p.i.

KHSRP

83

100

0

D

146

150

HNRNPR

ELAVL1

HNRNPU

G3BP1

G3BP2

SRSF1

SRSF2

SRSF7

SRSF3

SRSF9

SRSF6

SRSF10

Translation

SUGP2

U2AF1

RPS2

RUVBL1

RPL8

RPS3

Sm Complex

EIF2S1

RPL13
RPS3A

SNRPA SNRNP70 SNRPD2 SNRPD3

EIF2S3

RPL15

STRAP

RPS4X

EIF3B

RPL24
PELO

PTBP1

PTBP3

TRA2B

PURA

QKI

RALY

RBM4

RBM4B

RBM14

RBM47

RBMX

RBMS1

SARNP

SFPQ

SSB

SYNCRIP

TARDBP

ILF2

SND1

ILF3

ZCCHC3

TIA1

TRA2A

YBX1

RNA metabolism
CSTF3

CSTF2

CPSF7

CNOT1

poly-A binding
PABPN1

PABPC1 PABPC4

YBX3

ZC3HAV1

RNA PTMs ER RBPs

Cyto signaling

HAT1

MRM2
ARF4

CCT3

CCT4

HDLBP

MAPK1

PPP1CA

PPP1CC

Log2 ChIRP-MS Enrich

FAM120A

HDGF

SRI

ANXA5

PRSS3P2

10

FABP1

NCL

NCOA5
POLDIP3

ZNF326

ZNF638

EIF4B

RACK1

EIF4H

DNA Damage

RAN

FEN1
CCAR2

RANBP1

ACAT2

COPB2

PDCD6IP

AP3M1

RAB2A
GDI2

SNX5

GIPC1

MAP4

USO1

SCFD1

AHCY

APEX1

CAPZA1
SEPTIN2
CORO1B

CLTC

PDLIM1

CFL1

CNN3

PSMB5

TBCB

TUBB6

MAPRE1

CACYBP

NUDC

SLC9A3R1

CAND1
CNDP2
ZC3H15

IDH1

ST13

HSPB1

HSPA4

DNAJB1

PYCR2

TKT

GSR

MAT2A
PPA1

PGD

PSMD5
USP10

EZR

GPI

Protein metabolism

ACTN4

SEPTIN7

ACLY

ALDH1A1

DCXR

CKB

CAPZB

Intracellular vesicles

RAB10

RPS27A

FUBP3

Cytoskeleton/
actin/tubulin network

ANXA4

RAB7A

EIF4A3

ETF1

Metabolic enzymes

RAB1B

0

EIF4A1

RPS26

PRPF19

LSG1

Other
UGDH

RPS17

FUBP1

SARS-CoV-2
RNA

PPP1CB

BZW1

EIF3I

PRMT1

RTCB
PUS1

EIF3F

RPS14

Nuclear complexes

CCT2

RRBP1

EEF1A1

RPS12

MOCOS

PRDX6

YWHAB

FASN

GSTP1

YWHAQ

ADH5

C11orf54
GFPT1

HMGCS1

NME2

PSAT1

ADSL
ATIC

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 3

B

A
40

425

400

SARS−D1

ChIRP-MS Hits
(Intersection Size)

SARS−D2

PC2: 12.9%

ZIKV-D2
DENV-D2

20

RV-D2

0

300

184

200

167 164

143 138

114
84

100

69

51

38

24

24

23

22

0
SARS-D2

−20

ZIKV-D2
DENV-D2

PC1: 35.5%

20

40

RV-D2
900

600

300

Set Size

0

D
SARS−D1

Intracellular Ribonucleoprotein Complex

SARS−D2

Membrane

ZIKV-D2

Ribosome

DENV-D2

Mitochondrion

RV-D2

Proteasome Complex

PSMB7
PSMD3
PSMD6

10

PSME1
PSMA2
PSMA5
PSME2
PSMB6

0

PSMG1
PSMB2
PSMC1

Proteasome Accessory Complex

PSMD12
PSMB1

Endoplasmic Reticulum

PSMC2

GO: Cell Components
0

50

100

150

200

PSMD11
PSMD7

250

PSMA3
PSMC4

Translational Initiation

PSMA1

mRNA Splicing, via Spliceosome

PSMA6

PSMD2
PSMA4

RNA Splicing

PSMB3
PSMD4

Number
of genes

Regulation of mRNA Stability

PSMC3
PSMD13

50
100

NIK/NF−kappaB Signaling
Antigen Processing and Presentation
TNF−mediated Signaling Pathway

PSMC5
PSMC6

200

PSMD14

300

PSMD5

PSMB5
PSME3

GO: Binding Protein
150

−log(Benjamini)

200

250

DENV-D2

100

ZIKV-D2

50

SARS-D2

0

PSMA7

RV-D2

mRNA 3'−end Processing

SARS-D1

C

0

Log2 ChIRP-MS Enrich

−20

60S

RPL13A
RPL4
RPL12
RPL15
RPL18A
RPL38
RPL23
RPL30
RPL27A
RPLP0
RPL36A
RPL37A
RPL35
RPL21
RPLP1
RPL36
RPL28
RPL18
RPL26
RPL27
RPL7
RPL22
RPL11
RPL19
RPL9
RPL6
RPL13
RPL10A
RPL7A
RPL5
RPL3
RPL23A
RPL24
RPL8
RPL34
RPL31
RPL17
RPL14
RPL29
RPL10

RV-D2
DENV-D2
ZIKV-D2
SARS-D2
SARS-D1

7

0

RV-D2
DENV-D2
ZIKV-D2
SARS-D2
SARS-D1

6

HNRNPA2B1
HNRNPA1
HNRNPM
HNRNPK
HNRNPD
HNRNPC
HNRNPH1
HNRNPR
HNRNPF
HNRNPA0
HNRNPDL
HNRNPA3
HNRNPL
HNRNPAB
HNRNPH3
HNRNPU
HNRNPH2
HNRNPUL2
HNRNPUL1
HNRNPLL

10

Ribosome

0

0

10

SEC13

0

COPZ1
COPG1
COPE
COPB2
COPB1
COPA
HDLBP
RRBP1

RBPs

ER translation

SEC63
SEC61B
SEC61A1
DDOST
RPN2
RPN1
OSTC
STT3B
STT3A
SRPRB
SRPRA
SRPK1
SRP9
SRP72
SRP68
SRP54
SRP14

6

vesicle/
cytoskeleton

m6A

0

SEPTIN7
SEPTIN2
TUBB6
CNN3
CFL1
CAPZB
CORO1B
CAPZA1
PDLIM1
TBCB
NUDC
ACTN4
CLTC
MAPRE1
MAP4
EZR

METTL17
ALKBH1
METTL15
ALKBH5
YTHDC1
METTL7A
YTHDC2
YTHDF3
YTHDF1
YTHDF2

DDX19B
DDX20
DDX18
DDX28
DDX50
DDX47
DDX46
DDX42
DDX23
DDX21
DDX19A
DDX39B
DDX3X
DDX6
DDX5
DDX17
DDX39A
DDX1

0

SARS-D1
SARS-D2
ZIKV-D2
DENV-D2
RV-D2

SARS-D1
SARS-D2
ZIKV-D2
DENV-D2
RV-D2

40S

7

Figure 4

RPS26
RPS3A
RPS3
RPS11
RPS8
RPS23
RPSA
RPS12
RPS25
RPS5
RPS10
RPS27
RPS24
RPS16
RPS7
RPS9
RPS6KA3
RPS28
RPS21
RPS15A
RPS15
RPS29
RPS27L
RPS27A
RPS19
RPS18
RPS14
RPS4X
RPS17
RPS2
RPS20
RPS13
RPS6

Log2 ChIRP-MS Enrich

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

RV-D2
DENV-D2
ZIKV-D2
SARS-D2
SARS-D1

RV-D2
DENV-D2
ZIKV-D2
SARS-D2
SARS-D1

7

0

RAB14
RAB6A
RAB1B
RAB2A
RAB5C
RAB10
RAB1A
RAB11A
RAB7A
RAB4A
RAB8A
RAB21
RAB8B
RAB5A
RAB5B
RABGGTB
RAB6D

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 5

RANBP1

FXR1

ELAVL1

RBM47

0

HNRNPA0

C1QBP

CSDE1

DAZAP1

FUS

FXR1

IGF2BP1

IGF2BP2

IGF2BP3

KHDRBS1

LIN28B

MATR3

MSI1

PELO

PTBP1

PTBP3

TRA2B

PURA

QKI

RBM4

RBM4B

RBM14

RBM47

RBMX

RBMS1

SARNP

SFPQ

SSB

SYNCRIP

TARDBP

ILF2

SND1

TIA1

ILF3

ZCCHC3

ZC3HAV1

TRA2A

YBX1

RNA PTMs ER RBPs
MRM2

−4

4

Helicases
HNRNPAB

DDX3X

SRSF1

HNRNPC

HNRNPD

HNRNPDL

PCBP1

PCBP2

DDX17

HNRNPF

HNRNPH1

HNRNPH3

HNRNPK

HNRNPL

DDX39B

DHX9

MOV10

HNRNPUL1

HNRNPM

HNRNPR

HNRNPU

ELAVL1

G3BP1

G3BP2

RUVBL1

YBX3

CSTF2

SRSF3

SRSF9

SRSF6

SRSF10

SNRNP70

SNRPD2

U2AF1

PABPN1

STRAP

SNRPD3

ARF4

CCT3

CCT4

PPP1CA

PPP1CC

sarscov2

SARS-CoV-2
RNA

PPP1CB

HDGF

SRI

ANXA5

FABP1

ANXA4

Mean CRISPR
z-score
3.5

RAB2A
RAB7A
RAB10

0

E

F

ZC3H15

EIF2S3
EIF3B

RPL24

EIF3F

RPS14

EIF3I

RPS17

EIF4A1

RPS26

EIF4A3

RPS27A

EIF4B

RACK1

EIF4H

HAT1

EEF1A1
ETF1

TRIM28
RBM47
HNRNPA2B1
SRSF10

DNA Damage

NCOA5
POLDIP3

ZNF326

ZNF638

RAN

FUBP1

CCAR2

RANBP1

PCBP2

FUBP3

TARDBP

FEN1
APEX1

MATR3
HNRNPM

Metabolic enzymes
ACAT2

Cytoskeleton/
actin/tubulin network

COPB2

PDCD6IP

AP3M1

GDI2

SNX5

GIPC1

MAP4

USO1

SCFD1

CAPZA1
SEPTIN2
CORO1B

CLTC

EZR

ChIRP-MS Core Pathways

G

Protein metabolism

PDLIM1

CFL1
TBCB

GPI

PSMB5

CNN3

CACYBP
CAND1

MAPRE1

ZC3H15

NUDC

USP10
CNDP2

ST13

HSPB1

HSPA4

DNAJB1

MAT2A

IDH1

PPA1

PGD

PSMD5

PYCR2

GSR

TKT

PRDX6

YWHAB

EWSR1

ADH5

DDX5

C11orf54

ATIC

FASN

GSTP1

MOCOS

ADSL

ACLY

ALDH1A1

DCXR

CKB

ACTN4

SEPTIN7

TUBB6

-3.5

AHCY

CAPZB

Intracellular vesicles
RAB1B

ChIRP-MS

PRMT1

NCL

FAM120A

PRSS3P2

PRPF19

Core Expanded

GFPT1

DDX17

HMGCS1

HNRNPU

NME2

PSAT1

RTCB

YWHAQ

DAZAP1

Pan-viral Sensitization

UGDH

RPS4X

LSG1

Other
BZW1

All

EIF2S1

RPL15

Nuclear complexes
HAT1

MAPK1

RPL8
RPL13

RPS3A

PABPC1 PABPC4

CCT2

RRBP1

RPS2
RPS3

poly-A binding

Cyto signaling

HDLBP

4

Translation

SUGP2

RPS12

RNA metabolism
CNOT1

0

CRISPR z-score

Sm Complex
SNRPA

CPSF7

SRSF2

SRSF7

DDX39A DDX19A

CSTF3

ACTA1

CRIP2

SR proteins

DDX5

HNRNPA3

RTCB
PUS1

DDX6

HNRNPA1

HNRNPA2B1

DRG1

PGM1
EEF1A2
SURF4

PA2G4

RALY

TXN

-2

Resistance

L1RE1

A1CF
CNBP

JAGN1
EIF3D

RPS11

CPSF4

hnRNPs

RNA binding proteins

KHSRP

DTYMK

ZC3H15

CRISPR z-score

D

NUDT21

HARS2

CORO1C

MOV10

−4

HMGB1

HAT1
TRIM28

EIF3B

CAPZB

MVK

0

RV-D2

IGF2BP3 PNN

PSME3

DDX42

10

TARDBP

DDX6

NONO
SMARCA5

MATR3

SRSF7

10

PPA1

SMARCA4

20

2

DENV-D2

CNBP

0

ZIKV-D2

P-value (-log10)

20

RTCB

Log2 ChIRP-MS
Enrichment
5

30

SARS-VERO-D2

Log2 ChIRP-MS
Enrichment
9

0

P < 2x10-7
P < 0.0002

Resistance (11)
CRISPR sgRNA residuals

Sensitization (87)

SARS-VERO-D1

Resistance (4)

30

C

Expanded ChIRP-MS interactome (1430 proteins)

SARS-HUH-D2

Sensitization (29)

P-value (-log10)

B

Core ChIRP-MS interactome (309 proteins)

SARS-HUH-D1

A

ELAVL1

SLC9A3R1

DDX6

ChIRP-MS Sensitization Factors

ChIRP-MS Resistance Factors

PCBP1

Guide RNA

SRSF7

Average

CAD

EIF4G1
EIF3D
RPS28
RPL28
RPS11
CAPZB
TBCB
NUDC
CLTC
−2

Ribosome

0

CRISPR sgRNA residual

RBPs
Proteosome

2

Vesicle/Cytoskeleton
Translation

Full Library

NPM1

JAGN1

HSPA4

DMD

TKT

ACTA1
CRIP2

CNOT1

RBM47

NUDC

EEF1A2

CNBP

SURF4

TBCB

TRIM28
PGM1

ADSL

DRG1

CLTC

ZC3H15

RANBP1

HAT1

CAPZB

SMARCA4

PPA1
−2

0

2

CRISPR sgRNA residual

−2

0

2

CRISPR sgRNA residual

0
10
Log2 ChIRP-MS
Enrichment

SARS-CoV-2 Sensitization

Full Library
NONO
SMARCA5
CPSF4
RTCB
DTYMK
SRSF7
PPA1
MVK
CPSF1
CNBP
MATR3
NUDT21
HARS2
MVD
COASY
RANBP1
ARDBP
AASDHPPT
YNLL1
TXN

Full Library
PSME3
PSMG1
DDX42
DDX6
HNRNPM
HNRNPU
DDX17
DDX5
HNRNPA2B1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 6

A

C

VeroE6, 48 h.p.i., 264 RNAs enriched
50

SARS-CoV-2

Mt-rRNA.1

40

log10(-p-value)

Mock

Mt-rRNA

FN1

15

10

5

SPAG9

SNORD26

Mt_tRNA.12
SNORD27
HSP90AB1
SNORD28

SNORD34

SNORD29
SNORD60
SNORD56

2mm

2mm

MAP1B
SNORD121A RB1CC1

0

0

B

2

Mock

4

ChIRP-RNAseq Enrichment
log2(SARS-CoV-2/Mock)

SARS-CoV-2

HUH7, 48 h.p.i.,167 RNAs enriched
6

ARHGAP5

log10(-p-value)

GOLGA4

MKI67

RPL4

4

NAP1L1

HNRNPA2B1
HMGCS1

Mt−RNR2

RPLP0

SEC63
GFPT1

PRKDC

Mt−RNR1

2

PCM1

CENPF

HNRNPH1

UBA52

1mm

WAC
ATF7IP

1mm

AHCTF1
SMARCA5

TR

DY
N

RS

10

GL
UD
2
HA
GH

C

5A

DX

MT
2
SL
C2
5A
1
RA
RS
2
TO
MM
70
MM
AB
NL
N

5

M2

5
5A
C2

SL

SF

XN

1
OX
S

M

VAT
1

MR

IM

M

T

SARS-CoV-2

4

UN

NS

4

BP

FK

22

M

M
TO

A1
NO
CS
CY

UF

1

CD

PT

I2

EC

1

F

RF

MR

1

6A

DH

AL

S8

D3

PTC

BH1

HIB

2
FA1

U
ND

CH

ATPA

F2

GAT

V2

UF

ND

13

5

2

UF
A5

LL

ND

ALK

PR

SA

MT

C2

2
AT

BC

E2

AT

3A

Mock

CK

S1

1

SL

N

CR

AT
D

2

AM
TF
R4
CB

SY
G

ND

SARS-D1
SARS-D2
ZIKV-D2
DENV-D2
RV-D2

B

STOM
L2

MARS

2

LIG3

APEX1
RPS3
FEN1

TMX2

O1
TAC
5PB
ATP
AF7
NDUF
2
ELAC
D3
US
RP

SLIRP ECI2

GCAT

FDXR

DHX30
LARS2

CDK1

REXO2

UBA1

GRSF1

DNAJA1

PNPT1

PPP1CC

PDK1

VDAC2

HSD17B8

SFN

ACADS

CAP1

PARS

2

AIP

L2HG

DH

34

TOMM

Area of mitochondria (mm2), n = 190
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

D10

0

DH

HA

BP

S2

GC

D2

CH

SS

HM

RA

CH

K5

CD

R
GS
3
AC
VD
1
7A
DH
AL
P1

T

COQ

ABH

3

D

TARS2
VDA
C1

AK3

MGST
1
ATP5MF

HSD17B10

ABAT

SLIRP

SLC25A3

HARS2

Log2 ChIRP-MS
Enrich

2

PEP

AASS

S
FAR

XPN

PU

DLS

SOR

ATP5F1C
O
SELENO
FS1
UQCR

ChIRP-RNAseq Enrichment
log2(SARS-CoV-2/Mock)

E

D

4

ATP5PD

2

C1QBP

0

FAS

TKD
5
QTR
T1

S2

ADS

BP2

COX

IS
SEC

4I1

IN1
CAV
L4
ACS
T7
ACO
4
CLIC

AC
OT1
3

AG
M

PO

Mitochondrial associated proteins

X2
L3

S
AC

17

U1

1
S3

5

S3

40

PL

3

22

5

28

7

MRPS5

MRPL1

MRPS9

MRPL37

MRPL12

MRPL38

L23

55

26
MRPS

MRPL11
MRPL24

X

MRPS

MRP
L45

MRP

R6

MRPL

30

0

18B

MR
PS

PS

PL1

MR

PS
2

PL

PL
9

MR

MR

PS

34
PS

PS
2

MR

MR

1

MR

R
M

9

S2

H

MR

RP

S2

S2
8

M

RP
L3

4

1
NT

H2

TR

D
AL

AK

AL
ER

R
YA

RD

SA

L
D1
HF
O2
−C
MT
IF2
MT

MT

O1
MT
2
CH
MT
H
MTD
P
MTA

MTM

MTHFD1

MTRE

MTTP

e

nom

-ge
mito

PR

PD

R

M

CA

SD

54

PL

RP

RP

M

M

RP

M

1

F2

3A

PB

RS

SQ

HA

5IF

AT
AD

GT

KA

1

P3

1

MT

C1

L

EM

NF

1

L2

RP

M

M

PL

MR

LR

RC

TH

AT
P

MR

TM

AT

4

Full Library
HARS2
DHX30
HSD17B10
FARS2
DYNLL1
MRPL24
MRPL37
SSBP1
MRPS30
TRMT10C
MRPL11
Guide RNA

SARS2

Average

GATB
−2

0

2

CRISPR sgRNA residual

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure S1

Read Count

A

Huh7.5 ChIRP-RNAseq QC

VeroE6 ChIRP-RNAseq QC

2e+06

2e+06

1e+06

1e+06

0e+00

24hr
48hr
- - - + + + - - - + + + - - - + +
1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2

0e+00

Repeat Unique Map
Repeat Multimap
SARS Unique Map
SARS Multimap
Host Unique Map
Host Multimap
Unmapped

24hr
48hr
SARS-CoV-2 Infection
- - - + + + - - - + + + - - - + + + SARS-CoV-2 ChIRP
1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 BioRep #

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure S2
A

Presence in the Huh7.5
High Confidence Interactome

hnRNPs

RNA binding proteins
A1CF

HMGB1

C1QBP

HNRNPA0 HNRNPA1

CNBP

DAZAP1

FUS

FXR1

IGF2BP2

IGF2BP3

KHDRBS1

KHSRP

L1RE1

LIN28B

MATR3

MSI1

PA2G4

PELO

PTBP1

PTBP3

TRA2B

PURA

QKI

RALY

RBM4B

RBM4

RBM47

RBM14

HNRNPD

HNRNPDL

HNRNPF HNRNPH1
HNRNPUL1 HNRNPM

HNRNPC

SARNP

SFPQ

SSB

SYNCRIP

TARDBP

ILF2

SND1

TIA1

TRA2A

YBX1

YBX3

DDX6

SR proteins

DDX5

PCBP1

PCBP2

DDX17

HNRNPH3

HNRNPK

HNRNPL

DDX39B

DHX9

MOV10

HNRNPR

HNRNPU

ELAVL1

G3BP1

G3BP2

RUVBL1

SRSF1

DDX39A DDX19A

SRSF2

SRSF7

SRSF3

SRSF9

U2AF1

CSTF2

CPSF7

CNOT1

RPS2

STRAP

PABPC1 PABPC4

MRM2

Cyto signaling

RRBP1

ARF4

CCT3

CCT4

HDLBP

MAPK1

PPP1CA

PPP1CC

HAT1

PRPF19

NCL

NCOA5

LSG1

POLDIP3

ZNF326

ZNF638

sarscov2

SARS-CoV-2
RNA

PPP1CB

Other
BZW1

UGDH

FAM120A

HDGF

SRI

ANXA5

PRSS3P2

FABP1

ANXA4

EIF3I

RPS17

EIF4A1

RPS26

EIF4A3

RPS27A

EIF4B

RACK1

EIF4H

RAN

FUBP1

ETF1

DNA Damage

PRMT1

CCAR2

RANBP1

FUBP3

EEF1A1

EIF3F

RPS14

Nuclear complexes

CCT2

RTCB
PUS1

EIF3B

RPL24

RPS12

PABPN1

EIF2S3

RPL15

RPS4X

poly-A binding

EIF2S1

RPL13

RPS3A

ZCCHC3 ZC3HAV1

RNA PTMs ER RBPs

RPL8

RPS3

Sm Complex

RNA metabolism
CSTF3

Translation

SUGP2

SRSF6

SRSF10

SNRPA SNRNP70 SNRPD2 SNRPD3

RBMX

RBMS1

ILF3

DDX3X

CSDE1

IGF2BP1

Helicases

HNRNPA3 HNRNPAB HNRNPA2B1

Both 24 and 48 h.p.i.
48 h.p.i. only
24 h.p.i. only

FEN1
APEX1

Metabolic enzymes
ACAT2

Cytoskeleton/
actin/tubulin network

COPB2 PDCD6IP

RAB2A
RAB7A
RAB10

CAPZA1
SEPTIN2

AP3M1

GDI2

SNX5

GIPC1

MAP4

USO1

SCFD1

CLTC

CORO1B

PDLIM1
CNN3

CFL1

EZR

TBCB

TUBB6

PSMB5
CACYBP
CAND1

MAPRE1

ZC3H15

NUDC

USP10
CNDP2

IDH1

ST13

HSPB1

HSPA4

DNAJB1

PYCR2

PRDX6

C11orf54
GFPT1

HMGCS1

NME2

PSAT1

YWHAQ

YWHAB

TKT

ADH5

ADSL
ATIC

FASN

GSTP1

MOCOS

MAT2A
PPA1

PGD

PSMD5

GSR

GPI

Protein metabolism

ACTN4

SEPTIN7

ACLY

ALDH1A1

DCXR

CKB

CAPZB

Intracellular vesicles
RAB1B

AHCY

SLC9A3R1

B

Presence in the VeroE6
High Confidence Interactome

hnRNPs

RNA binding proteins
C1QBP

A1CF

HMGB1

HNRNPA0 HNRNPA1

CNBP

DAZAP1

FUS

FXR1

IGF2BP2

IGF2BP3

KHDRBS1

KHSRP

L1RE1

LIN28B

MATR3

MSI1

PA2G4

PELO

PTBP1

PTBP3

TRA2B

PURA

QKI

RALY

RBM4

RBM4B

RBM14

RBM47

RBMX

RBMS1

SARNP

SFPQ

SSB

SYNCRIP

TARDBP

ILF2

SND1

TIA1

TRA2A

YBX1

YBX3

ILF3

DDX3X

HNRNPD

HNRNPDL

HNRNPF HNRNPH1
HNRNPUL1 HNRNPM

CSDE1

IGF2BP1

Helicases

HNRNPA3 HNRNPAB HNRNPA2B1

HNRNPC

DDX6

Yes
No

SR proteins

DDX5

PCBP1

PCBP2

DDX17

HNRNPH3

HNRNPK

HNRNPL

DDX39B

DHX9

MOV10

HNRNPR

HNRNPU

ELAVL1

G3BP1

G3BP2

RUVBL1

SRSF1

SRSF2

SRSF7

DDX39A DDX19A

SRSF3

SRSF9

SRSF6

SRSF10

CPSF7

CNOT1

STRAP

poly-A binding
PABPN1

PABPC1 PABPC4

MRM2

Cyto signaling
ARF4

CCT3

CCT4

HDLBP

MAPK1

PPP1CA

PPP1CC

sarscov2

RTCB
PUS1

SARS-CoV-2
RNA

PPP1CB

HAT1

PRPF19

NCL

NCOA5

LSG1

POLDIP3

ZNF326

ZNF638

Other
BZW1

UGDH

FAM120A

HDGF

SRI

ANXA5

PRSS3P2

FABP1

ANXA4

RAB1B

RAB7A
RAB10

EIF3B

RPL24

EIF3F

RPS14

EIF3I

RPS17

EIF4A1

RPS26

EIF4A3

RPS27A

EIF4B

RACK1

EIF4H

EEF1A1
ETF1

DNA Damage

PRMT1
RAN

FUBP1

CCAR2

RANBP1

FUBP3

Metabolic enzymes
ACAT2

Cytoskeleton/
actin/tubulin network
CAPZB

Intracellular vesicles
RAB2A

EIF2S3

RPL15

Nuclear complexes

CCT2

RRBP1

EIF2S1

RPL13

RPS4X

ZCCHC3 ZC3HAV1

RNA PTMs ER RBPs

RPL8

RPS3
RPS3A

RPS12

RNA metabolism
CSTF2

RPS2

Sm Complex
SNRPA SNRNP70 SNRPD2 SNRPD3

CSTF3

Translation

SUGP2

U2AF1

COPB2 PDCD6IP AP3M1
GDI2

SNX5

GIPC1

MAP4

USO1

SCFD1

CAPZA1
SEPTIN2
CORO1B

CFL1

CLTC

EZR

PDLIM1

TBCB

TUBB6

NUDC

SLC9A3R1

CNN3

MAPRE1

PSMB5
CACYBP
CAND1
ZC3H15

USP10
CNDP2

IDH1

ST13

HSPB1

HSPA4

DNAJB1

PYCR2

MAT2A
PPA1

PGD

PSMD5

TKT

GSR

YWHAB

YWHAQ

GFPT1

HMGCS1

NME2

PSAT1

ADH5

C11orf54

ATIC

FASN

GSTP1

MOCOS

PRDX6

ADSL

ACLY

ALDH1A1

DCXR

CKB
GPI

Protein metabolism

ACTN4

SEPTIN7

AHCY

FEN1
APEX1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure S3
ChIRP-MS and PPI Overlap
ChIRP-MS and RAP-MS and PPI Overlap
ChIRP-MS and RAP-MS Overlap
ChIRP-MS Only

A
hnRNPs

RNA binding proteins
A1CF

HMGB1

C1QBP

HNRNPA0 HNRNPA1
CSDE1

CNBP

DAZAP1

FUS

FXR1

IGF2BP1

IGF2BP2

IGF2BP3

KHDRBS1

KHSRP

L1RE1

LIN28B

MATR3

MSI1

PA2G4

PELO

PTBP1

PTBP3

TRA2B

PURA

QKI

RALY

RBM4B

RBM4

RBM14

RBM47

HNRNPD

HNRNPF HNRNPH1
HNRNPUL1 HNRNPM

HNRNPDL

PCBP2

DDX17

HNRNPL

DDX39B

DHX9

MOV10

ELAVL1

G3BP1

G3BP2

RUVBL1

PCBP1

HNRNPH3 HNRNPK
HNRNPR

HNRNPU

SARNP

SFPQ

SSB

SYNCRIP

TARDBP

ILF2

SND1

TIA1

TRA2A

YBX1

YBX3

DDX6

SR proteins

DDX3X

DDX5

SRSF1

DDX39A DDX19A

SRSF2

SRSF7

SRSF3

SRSF9

U2AF1

CSTF2

CPSF7

CNOT1

RPS2

STRAP

PABPC1 PABPC4

MRM2

Cyto signaling
ARF4

CCT3

CCT4

HDLBP

MAPK1

PPP1CA

PPP1CC

sarscov2

RTCB
PUS1

SARS-CoV-2
RNA

PPP1CB

HAT1

PRPF19

NCL

NCOA5

LSG1

POLDIP3

ZNF326

ZNF638

Other
BZW1

UGDH

FAM120A

HDGF

SRI

ANXA5

PRSS3P2

FABP1

ANXA4

RAB1B

RAB7A
RAB10

EIF3I

RPS17

EIF4A1

RPS26

EIF4A3

RPS27A

EIF4B

RACK1

EIF4H

EEF1A1
ETF1

DNA Damage

PRMT1
RAN

FUBP1

CCAR2

RANBP1

FUBP3

Metabolic enzymes
ACAT2

Cytoskeleton/
actin/tubulin network

COPB2 PDCD6IP AP3M1
GDI2

SNX5

GIPC1

MAP4

USO1

SCFD1

AHCY

CAPZA1
SEPTIN2
CORO1B

CLTC

EZR

PDLIM1

CFL1
TBCB

TUBB6

GPI

Protein metabolism

ACTN4

SEPTIN7

PSMB5

CNN3

MAPRE1

CACYBP
CAND1
ZC3H15

NUDC

USP10
CNDP2

IDH1

ST13

HSPB1

HSPA4

DNAJB1

PYCR2

TKT

GSR

MAT2A
PPA1

PGD

PSMD5

ACLY

ALDH1A1

DCXR

CKB

CAPZB

Intracellular vesicles
RAB2A

EIF3F

RPS14

Nuclear complexes

CCT2

RRBP1

EIF3B

RPL24

RPS12

PABPN1

EIF2S3

RPL15

RPS4X

poly-A binding

EIF2S1

RPL13

RPS3A

ZCCHC3 ZC3HAV1

RNA PTMs ER RBPs

RPL8

RPS3

Sm Complex

RNA metabolism
CSTF3

Translation

SUGP2

SRSF6

SRSF10

SNRPA SNRNP70 SNRPD2 SNRPD3

RBMX

RBMS1

ILF3

HNRNPC

Helicases

HNRNPA3 HNRNPAB HNRNPA2B1

MOCOS

PRDX6

YWHAB

FASN

GSTP1

ADSL

ADH5

C11orf54

ATIC

GFPT1

HMGCS1

NME2

PSAT1

YWHAQ

SLC9A3R1

B

C

199
ChIRP-MS

30

18
RAP-MS

218
ChIRP-MS

11

321
PPI

FEN1
APEX1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure S4

A
EIF4E2
EIF2A
EIF4G2
EIF2S2

8
6

EIF3K

2

EIF4E

0

EIF5
EIF5A
EIF3E
EIF4ENIF1
EIF3J
EIF4G3
EIF3H
EIF4A1
EIF4A2
EIF3M
EIF4A3
EIF1AX
EIF3L
EIF5B
EIF3G
EIF2S3
EIF6
EIF3I
EIF2S1
EIF3F
EIF4B
EIF4H
EIF3B
EIF3D
EIF3C
EIF4G1

SARS-D1
SARS-D2
ZIKV-D2
DENV-D2
RV-D2

EIF3A

ChIRP-MS

4 Enrichment (log2)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure S5

A

SMARCA5
SMARCA1
BAZ1A

SMARCC1
SMARCA4

PD

3
ME

A2

EE

RP
M

CP
SF
3

M

6

CM
4

CM

T1

AR

SM

12

BP

H1

F1

SB
DS

R
AQ

G
SM

M

S3
0

PS

B1
SU

1
SF
CP

TR
RB

0
5
Log2 ChIRP-MS
Enrichment

TP
I1

G6

B1

TP
T1

1
VTA

1

P
UR

W
KO
GP

U
OT

PPP
2R1
A

RBM
10

O

RUV
BL2

DDX42

JAGN1

DHX30

O2

CSK

RPS28

SU M

SF3B4

NON

1
CN
AR

1
RPS

S
U2

B

LUC7L3

2

DNMT1

0

CRISPR sgRNA residual

EIF3D

−2

4

A5
C

PK

1

RG

E
TC

−4

N1

I
AC

1

MV

T
NM

5

O
IP

D

SU

1

N1
GC

RF

4

AR

XN
AT

G1

SE

C2

PR

10
PS

GM

2B

7

PL3
MR

DX

1

14
SRP

NAC

A

1
PFN

TUB

A1B

T
NUD

TXN

RPL28

1

MCM7

SARS-HUH-D1
SARS-HUH-D2
SARS-VERO-D1
SARS-VERO-D2
ZIKV-D2
DENV-D2
RV-D2

UBE2L3
CPSF4

ACTA1
HSD17B10

HARS2

21

EIF4G

SSBP1

DMD

DRG1
SF3B1

CNBP
PPA1

CAPZB

CHD2

RANBP1

FARS2

CNOT1

L11

MRP

ZC3H
15

MVK

ADS

L

1

PGM

SRS

F10

MK

DTY

PC
BP
2
HN
RN
PA
2B
1
MA
TR
3

N

FX

24

PL

1

BP

TA
RD
B

E6

CA
D

TB
GA

0C

HS
PA
4

Y

T

LL
1

TK

TC
CL

PS

RT
C

H1−2

CDK2

B

CRIP
2

PDE12

M

SNRP

FLII

TBC
D

1
PT

AA

SD

HP

PD

TH

UM

KL
C2

MG
1

28

PS

ID

H3
B

EL
P1

T1
HA

7
SF

17

SR1

DDX

EW

6

P
HNRN

PCBP1

DAZAP1

DDX5

HNRNPU

DDX

VL1
ELA

7

SR

M4
RB

IM

TR

DC
NU

DY
N

SA

2
RS
FD

AS
CO

4

T1

M

TR

TB
CB

CA

NM

AR

SS

SM

MR

NP
M
1
B

P

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.06.327445; this version posted October 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

HUH7, 48 h.p.i.,167 RNAs enriched
150

177

136

150
100

100

72

Intersection Size

Intersection Size

200

87

50

0

69
50

31

0

VeroE6 D1

HUH7 D2

VeroE6 D2
200

100

Set Size

0

HUH7 D1
200

100

Set Size

0

Figure S6

C
ChIRP-MS Enrichment log2(Virus/Mock)

A VeroE6, 48 h.p.i., 264 RNAs enriched B

HUH7 CoV2 Day 2
Vero CoV2 Day 2
ZIKV Day 2

12

DENV Day 2
RV Day 2
8

4

0

MRM2

FBL

MRM3

