bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

1

A path towards SARS-CoV-2 attenuation: metabolic pressure on CTP
synthesis rules the virus evolution
Zhihua Ou1,2, Christos Ouzounis3, Daxi Wang1,2, Wanying Sun1,2,4, Junhua Li1,2, Weijun Chen2,5*, Philippe
Marlière6, Antoine Danchin7,8*

1. BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China.
2. Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Unknown Pathogen Identification, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China.
3. Biological Computation and Process Laboratory, Centre for Research and Technology Hellas, Chemical
Process and Energy Resources Institute, Thessalonica 57001, Greece
4. BGI Education Center, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, 518083, China.
5. BGI PathoGenesis Pharmaceutical Technology, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China.
6. TESSSI, The European Syndicate of Synthetic Scientists and Industrialists, 81 rue Réaumur, 75002,
Paris, France
7. Kodikos Labs, Institut Cochin, 24, rue du Faubourg Saint-Jacques Paris 75014, France.
8. School of Biomedical Sciences, Li KaShing Faculty of Medicine, Hong Kong University, 21 Sassoon Road,
Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

* To whom correspondence should be addressed
Tel: +331 4441 2551; Fax: +331 4441 2559
E-mail: antoine.danchin@normalesup.org
Correspondence may also be addressed to chenwj@genomics.cn

Keywords
ABCE1; cytoophidia; innate immunity; Maxwell’s demon; Nsp1; phosphoribosyltransferase; queuine

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

2
ABSTRACT
Fighting the COVID-19 epidemic summons deep understanding of the way SARS-CoV-2 taps into its host
cell metabolic resources. We describe here the singular metabolic background that creates a bottleneck
constraining coronaviruses to evolve towards likely attenuation in the long term. Cytidine triphosphate (CTP)
is at the crossroad of the biosynthetic processes that allow the virus to multiply. This is because CTP is in
demand for three essential steps. It is a building block of the virus genome, it is required for synthesis of the
cytosine-based liponucleotide precursors of the viral envelope and, finally, it is a critical building block of the
host transfer RNAs synthesis. The CCA 3’-end of all the transfer RNAs required to translate the RNA
genome and further transcripts into the proteins used to build active virus copies is not coded in the human
genome. It must be synthesized de novo from CTP and ATP. Furthermore, intermediary metabolism is built
on compulsory steps of synthesis and salvage of cytosine-based metabolites via uridine triphosphate (UTP)
that keep limiting CTP availability. As a consequence, accidental replication errors tend to replace cytosine
by uracil in the genome, unless recombination events allow the sequence to return to its ancestral
sequences. We document some of the consequences of this situation in the function of viral proteins. We
also highlight and provide a raison d’être to viperin, an enzyme of innate antiviral immunity, which
synthesizes 3ʹ-deoxy-3′,4ʹ-didehydro-CTP (ddhCTP) as an extremely efficient antiviral nucleotide.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

3
IINTRODUCTION
The COVID-19 pandemic motivated a deluge of literature investigating the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus and its
epidemic propagation patterns—see (1) and https://pages.semanticscholar.org/coronavirus-research.
Detailed compositional and structural analyses both of the virus genome and of the proteins it encodes keep
accumulating at a fast pace (https://viralzone.expasy.org/8996). Yet, studies dealing with the way the virus
taps into its cell host’s metabolism are scarce. Exploring the nucleotide complement of the virus genome
setup in parallel with the corresponding constraints on the proteins it encodes, we investigated here how
unique metabolic features impact on the virus’ functions, as we aim at understanding and possibly revealing
alleviation of its virulence. A major feature explaining its pathogenicity is that the coronavirus genome mimics
the structure of cellular mRNAs, starting with a conventional 5’-end methylated cap (2) and ending up with a
3’-polyadenylated tail. While remarkably apt to create a stealthy contraption, this particular organization
makes that the general outline of the viral genome is an obstacle to antiviral therapy. The SARS-CoV-2
genome is so similar to that of the host’s mRNAs that standard interference with the virus expression
machinery will often also interfere with that of non-infected cells and be toxic to the host. A second hallmark
of the virus is that it is an enveloped virus. Being directly derived from the host, both these features are a
handicap when looking for therapeutic solutions. Consequently, these attributes imply drawing resources
from the cell’s nucleotide and lipid metabolism. Because the virus had to evolve ways to discriminate its fine
attributes from those of the host mRNAs and membranes, it must display idiosyncratic metabolic features
that might be used as antiviral targets.
A noteworthy feature shared by envelope construction and RNA synthesis is that both processes rely on
cytosine triphosphate (CTP) availability. This prompted us to analyse the consequences of the nucleotide
requirement for lipid construction of the viral envelope and the synthesis of its genome, as compared to the
host cell’s metabolism that ends up as mRNAs and membranes. We previously discussed how the series of
events which begins with copying the virus positive-sense RNA into a general template minus-sense RNA
that serves to generate new viral genomes and several individual transcripts of that template (3, 4) is tightly
linked to the metabolism of cytosine-containing nucleotides (5). We document here a further singular role of
CTP in its mandatory requirement for tRNA maturation into a functional entity, as this impacts availability of a
functional translation machinery. It had been noticed that the virus exploits a critical set of pyrimidine-related
metabolic pathways to access the pool of ribonucleoside triphosphates needed for the RNA-dependent
replication and transcription of the replicated RNA minus strand (6). However, the specific role of CTP was
overlooked. In addition to construction of copies of the genome a subset of lipid metabolism—based on
cytosine-containing nucleotides—is also recruited to allow for the synthesis of its enveloped capsid. This
makes the viral sequence highly sensitive to metabolic details of the cell’s CTP pool synthesis and
maintenance, likely to be reflected in the virus evolution as it mutates with a slow general decrease in
cytosine nucleotides, attributed at this time to causes that widely differ from what we present here—see e.g.
(7). By contrast, functional analysis could help us reveal unexpected key functions of the virus, marked by a
divergent trend in the local content of cytosine nucleotides. For example, if the presence of a subset of amino
acids—e.g. proline residues—in viral proteins was essential for key functions required for long term survival,
then a local increase in cytosine residues would expand the evolutionary landscape of the virus. This type of
local bias has indeed been highlighted in a previously discovered feature of coronavirus adaptation to the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

4
human host: in SARS-CoV-1 a GC-rich critical sequence of the virus spike protein—a leucine to alanine
mutation derived from a GC local enrichment, with a UUA codon changed into GCA—displayed positive
selection in the course of evolution of the SARS disease in 2003 (8). Here we depict first, with emphasis on
SARS-CoV-2, the details of cytosine-based metabolism that must be retained as a unique coordinator of the
global cell metabolism. We then explore the likely consequences of this dependency on the evolution both of
cytosine-related innate immunity processes and of the viral genome sequence. Subsequently, we delineate
critical details of the impact on the virus biological functions on the nucleotide composition of its genes and
consequences for its evolution.
RESULTS
In-depth analysis of pyrimidine metabolism highlights the unique position of CTP in metabolism
To understand how viruses recruit the functions of their host cells to their benefit, we must understand what
would be the point of view of a virus if it were to sustain continuous propagation. Essentially lacking
biosynthetic potential, a virus must tap into the host’s metabolic resources. This introduces a considerable
limitation in the metabolic options offered to viral replication. For this reason many viruses ended up coding
for functions that are missing or deficient in their hosts (9). Some even help their hosts to upgrade their builtin ability to make the most of their environment, thus ensuring a wealthy propagation of the viral progeny.
Auxiliary metabolic genes are commonplace in bacteriophages (10), but also in a variety of eukaryotic
viruses, such as herpes viruses (11). Selection pressure via efficacy of transmission multiplied by number of
replicates per cell, coupled to selection stemming from intracellular availability of essential precursors
(nucleotides, amino acids, lipids and carbohydrates) creates a variety of bottlenecks that shape the virus
evolutionary landscape (12–14). Furthermore, the envelope of many animal viruses is built up from
components of the host cell’s membranes (15, 16), as well as a capsid made of virus-specific proteins (17,
18). To harden them against environmental offences and provide them with addressing tags, some of these
proteins are glycosylated, which involves tapping into the cell’s resources of UDP-sugars and GDP-sugar
precursors (19, 20). Besides this uracil metabolism-dependent protective and tagging feature, we highlighted
here the relevance of the membrane lipids, which uniquely derive from precursors involving pyrimidines,
specifically liponucleotides based on a CDP skeleton (21–23). We also emphasized the need for a virus to
express its protein to have an active tRNA complement, necessitating the function of host CCAse. How the
construction of the building blocks are put together in an uninfected cell is therefore the very first challenge
faced by the virus after it has accessed the cytoplasm of the host cell. Finding an answer to this question
dictates the exploration of the mystery of the cells’ assembly lines that prepare them for growth. Before
exploring quantitative consequences of this unique design, we summarize how cytosine-based metabolism is
organized in the next couple of paragraphs.
The logic of energy management for nucleic acids synthesis
Synthesis of the viral RNA genome draws resources not only from the metabolism of pyrimidines but also
from the general logic of the cell’s energy management. A key chemical feature of the related processes is
that they rest on hydrolysis or synthesis of phosphate bonds (24). Versatility of these processes is ensured
by the usage of the shortest polyphosphate structure, that of nucleoside triphosphates, NTPs—we do not
consider here the special case of purely mineral polyphosphates (25). General metabolism is developed

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

5
along two lines with respect to its energy demands (this is illustrated in Figure 1 for pyrimidine metabolism).

Figure 1. Energy-driven pyrimidine-based nucleic acid metabolism
ATP is the general donor in the biosynthesis of pyrimidines. CDP, required as a precursor of dCTP synthesis
is produced by RNA turnover via hydrolysis or phosphorolysis (red arrows). RNA and DNA synthesis is driven
by pyrophosphate hydrolysis (green arrows indicate irreversible reactions). dTTP is results from a
pyrophosphate-driven reaction producing dUMP, and is finely tuned by thymidylate kinase, which makes its
immediate precursor dTDP.
When energy is meant to be used in a reversible way, NTPs are hydrolysed into NDP+Pi. This is where the
role of mitochondria is critical in non-proliferating cells (26). These organelles restore the ATP complement of
the cell, in particular to the endoplasmic reticulum—ER, (27), and in the present context this is crucial for the
generation of new viral particles. In contrast— and this is relevant not only for intermediary metabolism but
also for macromolecule biosynthesis, with more than 500 such reactions reported in the KEGG database
(28)—when the relevant pathways have to be driven forward, triphosphate hydrolysis produces
pyrophosphate (PPi). PPi is subsequently hydrolysed irreversibly into two phosphates by omnipresent
pyrophosphatases: NTP => NMP + PPi => NMP + 2 Pi, and this drives syntheses forward. Biosynthesis of
macromolecules rests to a great extent on this two-pronged strategy.
Diverging from this general design, DNA synthesis is an exception in most organisms. In this case, dNTP
synthesis is indirect. It is a two steps process. NDPs are used instead of NTPs as precursors of the dNDPs,
which are subsequently phosphorylated to dNTPs (29). The underlying metabolic logic is that, if DNA
synthesis used NTPs instead of NDPs, the nucleotide availability would build up a considerable metabolic
pressure driven by the cellular concentration of nucleotide precursors. This would affect genomes by
expanding progressively their length —which already usually occupies a sizeable portion of the cell’s volume

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

6
—from generation to generation. Using NDPs alleviates the difficulty: nucleotide reductases evolved so as to
use ribonucleoside diphosphates not triphosphates to make deoxyribonucleotides (30–32). The
concentration of NDPs is of the order of 1% that of NTPs because metabolism is poised to supply energy via
steady synthesis of ATP, used to keep the other NTPs at a high level as well. This lowers by two orders of
magnitude the metabolic pressure on DNA synthesis. Yet, using NDPs in this pathway leads to a logistic
metabolic cost, and this is specific to cytosine nucleotides, placing them in a singular position in metabolism.
De novo synthesis of cytidine triphosphate (and hence of all cytosine derivatives) does not go via a CDP
intermediate. It is the direct product of amidation of UTP (33), using glutamine as the nitrogen donor and
ATP, with CTP synthetase as a catalyst [EC 6.3.4.2 (34)]. This functional arrangement requires specialized
biochemical reactions in order to maintain a significant level of cytosine in DNA sequences. Synthesis of
CMP (and subsequently, or in parallel, CDP) is only achieved via RNA and membrane lipid precursors
turnover (red arrows in Figure 1 and red and purple arrows in Figure 2). A widespread consequence of this
feature is that DNA-based genomes tend to become progressively more AT-rich—note that depleting C in
double stranded DNA genomes must be followed by G depletion because of the first Chargaff’s parity rule
(35)—in a variety of conditions (36).
An unexpected secret of life: cytosine metabolism provides both a rheostat and a flywheel to
integrate growth of the various cell structures, constraining coronavirus development
Does this original role of cytosine nucleotides extend to RNA genomes? Not in any straightforward way:
synthesis of RNA utilizes NTPs, not NDPs. The singular requirement for NDP precursors for DNA synthesis
might even be a selective force that drove the evolution of viruses away from DNA-dependent forms, despite
the high intrinsic instability of RNA as compared to DNA. The dCDP bottleneck would prevent DNA viruses to
reach a high virus burst size and could make easier the emergence of some kind of innate immunity. It would
also favour emergence of viruses based on RNA metabolism and this should be taken into account when
exploring the origin of viruses (37, 38). Yet, we may ask: are RNA viruses still submitted to patent metabolic
constraints, and what would they be? At first sight, the answer looks negative, at least involving nucleotide
biosynthesis, because de novo synthesis of nucleotides allows direct production of each of the nucleoside
triphosphates. All the same, there might remain some persisting negative trend against cytosine
accumulation, because CTP synthesis requires both ATP and a nitrogen source, which makes availability of
the molecule highly sensitive to energy and nitrogen availability (Figure 2). However, this type of negative
pressure equally applies to synthesis of ATP, for example (39). Then, if anabolic processes are not preset to
modulate the stoichiometry of specific NTPs, what about their degradation and salvage?
All metabolites wear off with time. This implies that they must be degraded and recycled, either as a whole or
as parts. In the case of ribonucleotides, three units—a phosphate, a ribose, and a heterocyclic base—can go
through specific degradation or salvage pathways. During DNA turnover or following proofreading steps, a
fast track converts CMP to CDP then CTP, but in the case of dCMP, while this track exists, there is a parallel,
unexpected one that begins with deaminating dCMP into dUMP, which subsequently feeds into the TTP
biosynthetic pathway—see (40, 41) and Figure 1. Another pathway produces cytidine after hydrolysis of the
5’-phosphate of CMP, then deaminates it to uridine (42), or, in bacteria but not in multicellular organisms,
producing cytosine then deaminated to uracil (43), which is mainly scavenged directly by uracil

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

7
phosphoribosyltransferase (EC 2.4.2.9, Figure 2 blue arrow) directly into UMP. That this indirect route plays
a crucial role in cells is witnessed for example in the fact that the whole RNA-derived salvage pathway
(cytidylate phosphatase and cytidine deaminase) is critical in embryonic development (44). This is because
any imbalance in dNTP pools is highly mutagenic (45). Furthermore, the enzymes of this salvage pathway
are also important to recycle the modified derivatives of cytosine which result from frequent metabolic
accidents or are encountered as epigenetic markers (46) .
Remarkably, the salvage pathways are straightforward for all nucleobases, cytosine excepted (Table 1).
Table 1. Cytosine-related salvage in human cells: present and missing enzymes with bacteria for
comparison
H. sapiens

E. coli

B. subtilis

Enzyme name

Catabolism
3.5.4.12

DCTD

absent

comEB

dCMP/CMP deaminase

3.1.3.5

NT5E
NT5C3
NT5C1A

umpG
pynN(yjjG)

nucF(yutF)
pynN(yfnB)
ycsE
yktC

5’-nucleotidase

3.5.4.5

CDA

cdd

cdd

cytidine deaminase

3.5.4.1

absent

codA (cda)

absent

cytosine deaminase

3.2.2.8

absent

rihA(ybeK)
rihB(yeiK)
rihC(yaaF)

absent

ribosylpyrimidine nucleosidase

CTPS1
CTPS2

pyrG

pyrG

CTP synthetase

2.7.4.14

CMPK1
CMPK2

absent

absent

UMP/CMP kinase

2.7.4.25

absent

cmk

cmk

cytidylate kinase

UPP1
UPP2

udp

2.4.2.9

UPRT

upp

upp

uracil phosphoribosyltransferase

2.7.1.48

UCK1
UCK2
URKL1

udk

udk

uridine kinase

2.7.4.22

absent

pyrH

pyrH

uridylate kinase

2.7.4.6

NME1 –
NME7 (7
genes)

ndk

ndk

nucleoside diphosphate kinase

Synthesis
6.3.4.2
Salvage

Recovery
from U
2.4.2.3

uridine phosphorylase
pdp

The purine salvage pathways have been thoroughly explored, in particular in animal pathogens and in plants
(47–49), while the pyrimidine salvage pathways have remained somewhat less studied (50). The
omnipresent roles of ATP and S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet) often ends up with adenine as a waste

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

8
product. As a consequence, natural selection retained a variety of enzymes meant to scavenge adenine
wastes, so that any downwards trend in the ever critical ATP supply would be easily overcome—see e.g. (51,
52). A key enzyme in this salvage process is adenine phosphoribosyltransferase [EC 2.4.2.7, (53), 1286
references at PubMed on 18/06/20]. In the same way, guanine or uracil are salvaged via (hypoxanthine)guanine phosphoribosyltransferase [EC 2.4.2.8, 1536 references at PubMed on 18/06/20, (54)], or uracil
phosphoribosyltransferase EC 2.4.2.9, (55), 310 references at PubMed on 18/06/20]. Further comparable
activities exist, such as orotate phosphoribosyltransferase EC 2.4.2.10 (56)—which inputs orotate at the
beginning of the pyrimidine biosynthetic pathway—and the somewhat less similar nicotinamide
phosphoribosyltransferase EC 2.4.2.12 (57). These enzymes share a common descent, showing that life has
easily evolved a panoply of related activities.

Figure 2. Synthesis and salvage of pyrimidine nucleotides
Synthesis of UMP begins with orotate phosphoribosyltransferase followed by decarboxylation (brown
arrows). The anabolic pathway ends up with UTP and CTP (green arrows). Salvage of CTP stems from RNA
metabolism (red arrows) and lipid metabolism (purple arrows). Degradation and scavenging of cytosinebased nucleotides goes through uracil-based scavenging and return to the CTP biosynthetic pathway, with
cytosine deamination of intermediates as critical steps. Uracil phosphoribosyltransferase matches the role of
the orotate counterpart in the ultimate salvage of the base (blue arrow). No counterpart has been yet

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

9
identified, to our knowledge (see text), for scavenging cytosine (crossed out light blue arrow). Distribution of
relevant enzymes in H. sapiens and model bacteria is illustrated in Table 1.
It was therefore expected that the same would hold true for cytosine, allowing the cell to scavenge the base
easily from its environment. Yet, it appears that no cytosine phosphoribosyltransferase exists in any extant
organism (light blue arrow, Figure 2). Preliminary work with the protozoon Giardia lamblia suggested that
this activity might be present in the organism (58, 59). Surprisingly however, deciphering the genome
strongly suggested that CTP was derived from cytosine deamination into uracil, followed by salvage of uracil
and amidation. Indeed in the most recent release of GiardiaDB, there appears to be no sequence in the
genome of the organism that could be attributed to cytosine phosphoribosyltransferase—see (60) for access
to the genome database. At this point, therefore, no extant organism codes for such an enzyme. By contrast,
despite the lack of de novo biosynthesis pathways for pyrimidines in this organism, the genome still codes for
a CTP synthetase (PyrG). This is in line with the general observation that cytosine and related cytosinecontaining derivatives are systematically deaminated into uracil-containing derivatives, subsequently
processed to regenerate CTP (Figure 2, and Figure 1 for salvage of processed DNA derivatives). As a
further case in point pyrG has also been found as a necessary complement required for life in the smallest
genome of an autonomous synthetic construct (61). This strongly suggests that recovering CTP requires a
uracil-dependent pathway as well as that independent management of cytosine-based nucleotides is critical
to govern metabolism, even in the presence of a rich supply of metabolites from the outside—note that
Giardia is a parasite.
This singular positioning of CTP synthesis in metabolism makes CTP synthetase a convenient enzyme to
adjust the flow of cytosine-containing nucleotides, acting as a rheostat does in an electric contraption—see
e.g. (62). Substantiating this unique role, the functional structure of the enzyme displays a very unusual
architecture. It makes filaments, named cytoophidia—specific membrane-less organelles that control the
spatial distribution of cytosine-dependent intermediary metabolism (63, 64)—in all the organisms where its
organization has been explored (65). The structure of CTP synthetase is important in the present context
because the synthesis of membrane lipids is a further metabolic step that involves the nucleotide, with most
membranes deriving from cytosine-based liponucleotides (66, 67). While the precise membrane lipid
composition differs in the three domains of life, the general organisation of the cognate pathways is similar.
Because the lipid content of cells can vary over a wide range, the stores of CDP-containing liponucleotides,
in particular in eukaryotes—with an important network of intracellular membranes—is preset to play the role
of a flywheel, allowing fine tuning of the availability of cytosine-derived metabolites in the cell when
conditions vary. This property could have been advantageously recruited for innate immunity. Finally, as
perhaps could be expected at this point of our demonstration, the very first enzymes for de novo synthesis of
pyrimidines, carbamoyl-phosphate synthetase (CPSase), aspartate transcarbamylase (ATCase), and
dihydroorotase (DHOase) are associated into a multifunctional structure, named CAD (68). Besides a
general role in management of cell growth, CAD is highly expressed in leukocytes, where it enables Toll-like
receptor 8 expression in response to cytidine and single stranded RNA (69), a situation met upon infection by
RNA viruses. Supporting a role of CAD in antiviral innate immunity, its activity is modulated by a dedicated
viral protein during Enteroviral infection (70) .

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

10
Consequences of cytosine-related imbalance in the nucleotids composition, evolution and coding
capacity of coronavirus genomes
The most straightforward consequence of the metabolic qualitative design just outlined is that a metabolic
force will keep driving the cytosine content of RNAs to lower values, unless opposite processes—and
selection pressure leading to discard organisms with too low cytosine content, for example because this
would create unbearable biases in the amino acid composition of the proteins coded by these genomes—
had the upper hand during evolution. This prompted us to develop a brief quantitative analysis of pyrimidine
metabolism in relation with SARS-CoV-2 infection, as we now document.
Cytosine content-related phylogeny of some virus isolates
The constraint on cytosine availability witnessed in the composition of coronaviruses—in particular SARSCoV-2—is likely to reflect the coupling between synthesis of viral particles and the host cell’s metabolic
capacity. In order to assess the evolution of the virus with these metabolic constraints we decided to evaluate
the C content using 89 representative strains from the four genera of coronaviruses, which were selected
based on their phylogenetic and host background. Here we developed two distinct approaches in order to
take into account 1/ the nucleotide patterns across the virus group, and 2/ the coding sequence-related
limitations that constrain the function of the viral proteins as they adapt to their host.
To study the evolution of coronaviruses, we used standard techniques to generate a phylogenetic tree of
representative strains (see Methods section), where we highlighted the average cytosine content of each
viral genome (Supplementary Figure 1). There is significant variation between the cytosine content of
viruses of different clades. Based on 89 representative genomes we found that coronaviruses have 27.3% A,
17.9% C, 21.5% G and 33.3% U on average. Overall, the coronavirus genomes contain a bit more
pyrimidines than purines, with a mean content for C+U of approximately 51.2%.
Currently, seven coronaviruses are known to infect humans. These include four epidemic CoVs causing mild
respiratory symptoms in humans (HCoV-229E, HCoV-NL63, HCoV-HKU1 and HCoV-OC43), the severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV-1) causing the pneumonia outbreak during 2002-2003
in China (71), the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) still causing small outbreaks
through camel-to-human transmissions in the Middle East and the newly emerged SARS-CoV-2 (72). These
viruses all originated from bat species, although the exact intermediate hosts involved in human infections
remains obscure (73–77). Interestingly, the cytosine content of bat viruses is variable (from 16.0% to 21.5%),
reflecting the diverse virus species harboured by bats, which make a very diverse natural reservoir for many
coronaviruses. Intriguingly, we observed a lower cytosine content for the four human established epidemic
viruses (HCoV-HKU1, 13.0%; HCoV-NL63, 14.4%; HCoV-OC43, 15.2%; HCoV-229E, 16.7%) than the three
spillover-related viruses infecting humans (SARS-CoV, 20.0%; MERS-CoV, 20.3%; SARS-CoV-2, 18.4%)
and most bat viruses. The four human epidemic viruses have been established in human populations for
decades. The significantly low cytosine content observed for these two viruses may indicate host-related
features impacting cytosine-containing metabolites availability. Several studies of the codon usage biases in
emerging coronaviruses have been published, providing a general view of the situation—see e.g. (78),
without, however, exploring the contextual constraints in terms of metabolic properties of their hosts.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

11
If the adaptation of coronaviruses to the human species was to drive down the cytosine level in the virus
genome, then we might expect the cytosine content of SARS-CoV-2 strains to decrease as the epidemic
unfolds. Our regression model is consistent with this view (Figure 3).

Figure 3: Dynamic of base composition at the coding regions of SARS-CoV-2.
The base composition of the coding regions concatenated by 26 ORFs of SARS-CoV-2 is displayed. Each
dot represents one sequence. The calculation was based on 2,574 unique SARS-CoV-2 strains isolated from
December 24th, 2010 to April 17th, 2020.
It allowed us to estimate that SARS-CoV-2 may lose its C complement by 0.000516 base per position per
year (y = −0.000516x + 1.226, adjusted R2 = 0.1459) while gaining U by 0.000634 per year (y = 0.000634x 0.9591, adjusted R2 = 0.1835), under its current circulation dynamics in susceptible populations. A parallel
increased trend for A and a decrease for G was also observed, but with more moderate slopes than those for
C and U. A Wilcoxon rank sum test showed that the content of the four bases in the SARS-CoV-2 sequences
was significantly different in each case, while somewhat correlated with each other. The strongest
correlations were observed between two groups (Supplementary Figure 2): a decrease in A was
significantly correlated with an increase in G (adjusted R2 = 0.5738), while a decrease in C was significantly
correlated with an increase in U (adjusted R2 = 0.7177). As a consequence the SARS-CoV-2 virus is on its
way to gradually lose C during its adaptation in humans, resulting in a genomic base composition more like
those of the four previously established human endemic coronaviruses.
The second approach did not aim at creating a phylogeny of the viruses, but, rather, a cladistic tree showing
structural properties shared by viruses that are likely to indicate affinity of functional features. This approach
assumes that, after sufficient time of evolution, the nucleotides present at the majority of sites in the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

12
sequence have had chances to be modified several times reaching local saturation, so that it is difficult or
impossible to link those with specific features of the proteins encoded in the virus (the beginning and end of
the sequence, that are critical for RNA-dependent replication are not taken into account). By contrast, the
presence of insertions or deletions (indels) will affect considerably the overall structure of the proteins, and
this should impact their function in a way that is not likely to be reversible—see for example (79). An earlier
such report (80) demonstrated the usefulness of this approach.

Figure 4a

Figure 4b

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

13
Figure 4. Phylogeny of coronavirus representatives based on full genome sequences (panel A) and
on indels (panel B)
A genome-based tree is generated based on the full genome sequence alignment of the group (panel A) and
a gap-based tree is created, based on insertions and deletions (indels) only (see Methods). The seven
known human coronavirus strains are highlighted by a red colour for the corresponding branches. A panel on
the right indicates the four coronavirus groups; in panel B, the two incongruent sub-groups are shown by the
same colour code with reduced opacity (alpha and beta sub-groups). For details, please see text.
The use of cladograms in this case attempts to show the relative distances and should not necessarily reflect
the evolutionary history of the group. Compared to the standard alignment of the 89 reference genomes
(Supplementary Table S1 and Supplementary Figure 1), the equivalent gap-based alignment uses
undefined characters for nucleotides and ‘dummy’ characters for gaps to cheat the algorithms for tree
construction so that distances are calculated on the basis of the sums of scores for gap positions (presence
of indels, see Methods). While it is not possible to check one by one each and every gap, the common ones
are likely to reflect a common structure or function characteristic of the corresponding region (Figure 4).
Remarkably, both the standard, genome-based tree and the gap-based tree are quite congruent—i.e.
knowing only the indel content is enough to draw a tree that describes the relationships between the
coronavirus groups (Figure 4). In the genome-based tree, the four groups of coronaviruses are detected
clearly, and the seven human virus strains are highlighted, in groups alpha and beta (Figure 4a). In the
gap/indel-based tree, the four groups are also consistently derived, with the exception of a beta sub-group
that contains the two human viruses with reduced pathogenicity potential, compared to the beta sub-group
that contains the SARS, MERS and SARS-2 strains (Figure 4b). At the same time, a tiny alpha sub-group
exhibits similar indel patterns with the latter beta sub-group, presumably with similar indel patterns. It is
tempting to speculate that these alpha sub-group strains may share certain hitherto unknown properties that
might render them potentially dangerous in terms of zoonotic disease capacity. The observed patterns could
be interpreted as showing that what is coded in the indel regions has a considerable weight on the virus
adaptation to their hosts and does not strictly depend on the base composition and amino acid coding
potential of the genome sequences. More research is needed to establish the nature of indel-based trees in
the future.
Biased codon composition of the regions coding for individual viral proteins
Coronaviruses, and many positive-sense single-stranded RNA viruses as well, produce plus strands at a 50to 100-fold excess of their minus-strand replicated template. Because several regions in the 3’ half of the
virus are « transcribed » from the template RNA minus-strand of the virus (81), a further deviation from parity
should appear in the nucleotide usage for virus construction. This means that the overall nucleotide
consumption is not strictly constrained by the second Chargaff’s parity rule, that would result in an amount of
A equal to that of U, and G to that of C (82). The virus multiplication rests on a RNA-dependent replication
process, so that any pressure on a given base availability—here C—would affect its complement—G in our
case. As discussed in the previous section, we expected a general selection pressure operating on CTP and
tending, in the long run, to decrease the C content of the RNA virus, but also that of G.
Furthermore, this implies a particular imbalance in the nucleotide composition of the viral RNA, allowing it to
differ from standard mRNAs of the host cell. We therefore expect that the virus will interfere with the host’s

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

14
translation machinery in a way that allows it to be discriminated positively against the cell’s mRNAs (see
Discussion). This should have consequences for the translation of the viral genome. The virus encodes
proteins that have essential functions for its development, not only for the replication machinery and the
formation of a capsid, but also for several ancillary functions needed for hijacking the host metabolism. The
constraint on the genome nucleotide composition must be reflected in the codon usage bias of the virus
protein coding sequences, with important consequences on the way tRNAs are used. Furthermore because
natural selection acts on viral functions, it can be expected that the outcome of the general C lowering trend
will differ in different proteins encoded by the virus, depending on the selection pressure constraining their
functions. Taking advantage of the degeneracy of the genetic code, SARS-CoV-2 could also limit its C
content via the use of alternatives at the third codon position by selective codon usage.
To explore this hypothesis, the relative synonymous codon usage (RSCU) values were calculated for each
coding region of SARS-CoV-2 to reveal any differential usage of synonymous codons. An RSCU value of 0,
0~0.6, 0.6-1.6 or >1.6 implies that a codon is not-used, under-represented, normally-used, or overrepresented—respectively for the four value ranges (83). Among the 26 major coding regions, six (Nsp11,
ORF10, ORF7b, ORF6, E and Nsp7) have a translated peptide length of less than 100 amino acids, which
would result in codon usage profiles of low statistical significance. For example, Nsp11 encodes only 33
amino acids, which explains the very limited number of codons utilized by the corresponding gene. These
sequences were not further analysed (Figure 5). The three codon positions do not have the same
importance in the selection of specific amino acids. Pressure against C must have consequences in terms of
the protein coding landscape of the virus. In general, in regions where tRNA choice allows a wobble between
U and C, the virus sequence is considerably enriched in U. It seems noteworthy that the codon usage bias
and bias in tRNA choice differs between genes of the human host and the virus genes, except for two viral
proteins, accessory protein Nsp1 and nucleocapsid protein N, notwithstanding preference of U over C—e.g.
preference for GGU and CGU codons in protein Nsp1 (Supplementary Figure 3).

coding regions
The 20 SARS-CoV-2 ORFs with a length of over 300 nucleotides were submitted to RSCU calculation. The
codon usage for 120,426 human coding regions was also displayed to facilitate comparison. Codons are
displayed with the first letter denoting the amino acid and the three letters following a dot representing the
codon. Codons containing a CpG dinucleotide are suffixed by an asterisk. The four panels separate the
codons according to the nucleotide located at the third codon position. Codons that are not used (RSCU=0),

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

15
under-represented (RSCU<0.6), normally utilized (RSCU ranges between 0.6-1.6), or over-represented
(RSCU>1.6) are labeled in gray, blue, ice cold and yellow, respectively.
The first C codon position is used to input histidine, glutamine, proline, and arginine or leucine in proteins.
This is particularly significant for the proline residue, essential in the folding of key viral protein domains (Li et
al., 2014), because it is encoded by CCN codons. All proteins of SARS-CoV-2 prefer the usage of CCA or
CCU codons for proline, avoiding the usage of C and G (Figure 5). Histidine and glutamine are in two-codon
boxes, discussed below. Arginine presents a different situation because CGN codons can be replaced by
AGR codons: SARS-CoV-2 favours the AGA codon especially, with only one compulsory G. AGG codons are
enriched in proteins Nsp5, Nsp8 and Nsp9. Remarkably however, the Nsp1 protein, which corresponds to
the initial domain of the ORF1a(b) protein, and is translated very early on in the virus expression cycle,
contains only CGH codons (H = A, U or C) and this is in total contrast with the other viral proteins (except for
Nsp10, yet this protein has only two arginine residues, making this observation possibly irrelevant). Codon
CGG is only present 11 times in the coding sequences of the virus, suggesting that when present, it has
been submitted to positive selection, possibly at a site important for the translation-coupled folding of the
protein. The most interesting location of this codon is a doublet that corresponds to a four codon insertion in
the spike protein of the virus. Finally, the pressure on leucine content is also lower. CUN codons are used to
code for leucine, with the majority using codon CUU, but this amino acid can be introduced using the
alternative UUR codons. Yet, UUA is used more frequently than UUG. UUG is relatively enriched in proteins
Nsp6, Nsp8, ORF3a and N (Figure 5 and Supplementary Figure 3).
In the second position requiring a C we find proline again, and also threonine (ACN), alanine (GCN) and
serine (UCN). For threonine, codon ACU is the most used codon, progressively being generally replaced by
ACA as we progress along the genome sequence, ACC and ACG are rare. Alanine is mainly encoded by
GCU codons, followed by GCA, with protein Nsp1, again, differing somewhat from the other viral proteins in
that the frequency of GCA and GCU are the same. Serine (UCN) is able to escape much of the constraint
imposed by C availability as it can use the alternative AGY codons. Codons UCU and UCA are more or less
used in an equivalent way, except, again, in protein Nsp1, which mainly uses AGU and AGC codons. In
general AGC is seldom used while AGU is the dominant serine codon.
Finally, the third position can be replaced by A, U or G in the four codon boxes, two of which, valine and
glycine, are further discussed below. In general the corresponding NNC codons are rarely used. Again,
protein Nsp1 is an exception, with codon GGC used more frequently than GGU. Overall GGU is dominating
with some contribution of GGA, while GGG is often absent. In the case of valine (GUN codons), the
dominating codon is GUU, followed by GUA. By contrast, U-ending codons which are rarer than expected
are clustered in several proteins: UGU, UUU and UAU in protein N; AUU in Nsp10; CGU in Nsp16; GAU in
protein M, CAU in ORF8 and AAU and UCU in Nsp1. NAU codons correspond to two codon boxes (NAN
codons). These codons are discriminated along a pyrimidine / purine axis. A pyrimidine (NAY) is used to
maintain the same nature of the coded residue whether the codon uses a U or a C as its 3’ end (aspartate,
asparagine, histidine and tyrosine), while a purine (NAR) allows coding for glutamate, glutamine and lysine.
UAR codons are also specifying the terminal step of translation. As stated above, the SARS-CoV-2 genes
avoid the usage of C containing codons whenever possible (Figure 5). Moreover, probably due to the basepairing requirement imposed during transcription and replication, the virus also avoids the usage of G-ending

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

16
codons. This avoidance is maintained in the overall choice of NAR codons, except in protein Nsp6 where
CAG is preferred to CAA, as well as GAG over GAA and CAA over CAG, which suggests that this results
from a significant selection pressure. This is the more remarkable because Nsp proteins are cleaved off large
ORF1a and ORF1ab precursors. In general, and this is as expected, codons NAU are preferred over NAC
for the pyrimidine ending codons of NAN boxes. The exceptions are, for GAC, protein Nsp5 and protein M;
for CAC, Nsp10 and ORF7a; for AAC, protein Nsp1 and protein M; and for UAC, proteins Nsp1, Nsp5, Nsp9,
M, Orf7a and N.
tRNA-dependent modulation of synonymous codon translation
Consistent with metabolic pressure against CTP and despite their uneven coding length, most of the genes
of SARS-CoV-2 avoid the usage of the C-ending codons (Figure 5 and Supplementary Figure 3). A similar
low preference for C-ending codons was also observed for coronaviruses of other species and genera, as
calculated using the ORF1ab coding region (Supplementary Figure 4). The way tRNAs are utilized as a
function of the first anticodon (third codon) nucleotide is highly unsymmetrical. For this reason the
corresponding tRNA position (N34) is usually heavily modified, while specific tRNAs are deciphering
individual codons (Table 2).
A
A
G

Gm (uuu 0, uuc
10)

U

xcm5U (uua)
4

C

C (uug)
1+5*

A
G

G
Phe

Leu

I (cuu 9, cuc 0)

U
G/Q (uau 0,
uac 13*)

I (ucu 9, ucc 0)
ncm5U (uca)
4

Ser

G/Q (cau 0, cac
10)

U

U (cua)
3

C

C (cug)
9

C (ccg)
4

C (cag)
13

I (auu 14, auc
3)

I (acu 9, acc 0)

G/Q (aau 0,
aac 20)

A
G
U

Ψ (aua)
5*

C

C (aug)
9+1

A
G

Leu

ncm5U (gua)
5

C

C (gug)
11

Pro

Ile
ncm5U (aca)
6
Met

I (guu 9, guc 0)

U

ncm5U (cca)
7

Val

Thr

xcm5s2U (caa)
6

xcm5s2U (aaa)
12

C (acg)
5

C( aag)
15

I (gcu 22, gcc
0)

G/Q (gau 0,
gac 13)

ncm5U (gca)
8
C (gcg)
4

Ala

Tyr

G [C32 mod Ψ]
(ugu 0, ugc 29)

ter

C (ucg)
4
I (ccu 9, ccc 0)

C

xcm5s2U (gaa)
7
C (gag)
8

ter

ter

Cm (ugg)
7

His

I (cgu 7, cgc 0)

Gln

Asn

Lys

Asp

Glu

Cys

mcm5U (cga)
6

A

Trp

Arg

G

C (cgg)
4
G (agu 0, agc 6)
xcm5U (aga)
1+5*
C (agg)
5

Ser
U
Arg

G (ggu 0, ggc
14)
xcm5Um (gga)
9
C (ggg)
5

Table 2. Table of the genetic code with emphasis on decoding by individual tRNAs

Gly

C

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

17
The table displays the distribution of the 415 tRNAs coded in the human genome, among which 28 (noted
with an asterisk) must splice out an intron as a maturation step: 5 tRNAArg (AGA), 5 tRNALeu (UUG), 5 tRNAIle
(AUA) and 13 tRNATyr (UAC).
Interestingly, this constraint is easily matched by the tRNA supply of the cell because, contrary to codons
ending with a purine, which require distinct tRNAs to be decoded, codons ending with a pyrimidine (U or C,
Y) are mainly decoded by a common tRNA species. In the case of NAY codons, the position 34 of tRNAs is a
G, replaced by queuine (Q), if this metabolite of bacterial origin is present in the host. Availability of Q in the
environment may not have major consequences for translation of NAC codons, but it may alter the speed
and accuracy of translation of the NAU codons. G-ending codons are generally rare in the virus, but they do
not systematically correspond to rare tRNAs (Table 2). Because the anticodon position 34 of the cognate
tRNAs is either a guanine or a queuine (Q) residue (depending on a specific input from the environment) and
because NAU codons are translated in the absence of Q more slowly and less accurately than NAC codons,
a pressure towards NAC in a context where C availability seems to be limiting is probably significant. This
may apply to protein Nsp1 and to a lesser extent to protein M (see Discussion). All transfer RNA (tRNA)
decoding strategies depend on the type and extent of modifications at position 34 of the tRNA anticodon
(84). The codon usage bias in SARS-CoV-2 differs from that of average human proteins. In particular it is
enriched in codons that require tRNAs modified at position N34 of the anticodon with complex modifications
that are linked to zinc homeostasis (85), an important feature knowing that several of the virus functions are
Zn2+-dependent, while antiviral protein ZAP is a zinc-finger protein (86).
A prominent feature is that two A-ending codons, CUA and CGA are generally rare in the virus sequence
(Figure 5 and Supplementary Figure 3). This is significant, as witnessed by the facts that the cognate
codons CUU and CGU are particularly frequent (remember that A and U are both abundant in the virus
genome). CUA is decoded by a specific tRNALeu which is subject to specific regulation (87). In general NNA
codons are decoded by tRNAs which have heavily modified U34 residues (88). This imposes a burden on
the translation machinery that may impact the viral development, leading to negative selection. An exception
is, as reported above, the AGA codon, which is particularly frequent, and this makes protein Nsp1 stand out,
highlighting further A-ending codon deficiencies (GGA, CUA, CCA, AGA and GUA). The deficiency of Aending codons for nucleocapsid protein N, which is very rich in arginine residues and has the expected
excess of AGA is limited to UUA, AUA, CUA and GUA, which corresponds to a UpA deficiency in mammalian
genomes (89).
While the virus must certainly manage tRNA availability and adapt this resource to its specific codon usage
bias, it must also curb the innate antiviral immunity which affects the pool of tRNAs directly. In human cells,
tRNA molecules are synthesised as precursors that are maturated into pre-tRNAs that lack their CCA
terminal end and need to be further modified (90). Remarkably, stress-induced synthesis of the specific
protease angiogenin removes these CCA termini, stopping translation (91). Cells can overcome this process
using tRNA nucleotidyl transferase and CTP and ATP. This is yet another CTP-controlled function that must
be overcome by the virus. The specificity of angiogenin is modulated by tRNA modifications—this protease
can also cut the tRNA molecules at sites located in their anticodons (92)—and this may create an uneven
selection pressure on the various tRNAs used to decode the virus genes.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

18
DISCUSSION
Coronaviruses must tap into their host resources to build up multiple copies of their RNA genome and of their
envelope. In the present study we have documented the unique role of CTP as a general coordinator of the
cell’s metabolism. Metabolic availability of this nucleotide drives synthesis of the viral genome, its envelope
and maintains the translation machinery. This coordinated role makes us understand the presence of the
general innate immunity antiviral metabolite, 3'-deoxy-3',4'-didehydro-CTP (ddhCTP), produced from CTP by
the interferon-induced protein viperin (93). Indeed the role of ddhCTP has been somewhat elusive, with
experiments suggesting interference with RNA replication/transcription (94), while others demonstrated
interference with lipid metabolism (95), and none, at this time, showing that it should impact tRNA synthesis
via inhibition of CCAse, a plausible action of this analog of CTP.How did this integrative role of CTP emerge
during evolution?
Cells do not have to grow during viral infection. Yet, they result from billion years of evolution based on
growth. In a three-dimensional space—the physical space where material entities such as cells flourish—this
is akin to squaring the circle. Growth of the cytoplasm (three dimensions) must be matched with growth of
the membrane (two dimensions) and growth of the genome (one dimension). Putting together these three
facets while sharing a common metabolism cannot be straightforward. Alas, as often in biology, solving a
clear functional problem results more often than not in ad hoc solutions built on a fairly haphazard collection
of bits and pieces, with considerable differences between different species. This would then preclude any
consistent view of the anecdotes invented during evolution and end up in a catalog of solutions, as witnessed
in the millions of articles that tackle biological questions. We could anticipate that the extensive evolutionary
time scale allowed for a slow progression, exploring an infinite variety of directions.
Yet, we could be lucky and discover a universal set-up that may have some generality or even span the
whole tree of life. Because the number of the cell’s building blocks is small (mainly nucleotides, amino-acids,
phospholipids and carbohydrates), natural selection may have recruited a limited number of those
components to implement homeostatic regulation of the growth of the various cell compartments. From
detailed analysis of the genome signatures of various organisms and their metabolic constraints, we have
demonstrated that the biosynthetic and salvage pathways leading to CTP had remarkable consequences in
organizing core cellular functions. A first account of this discovery is presented in (5) and a detailed view is
presented in Figure 2. The highly involved set-up of this metabolic facet is significant for the manner and
process by which a virus invades a cell and subsequently evolves a progressively better adapted progeny.
Here we explored, using a functional analysis approach, how understanding this exceptional setup of
intermediary metabolism allowed us to anticipate this particular aspect of the evolution of RNA viruses. The
main conclusion we reached is that, overall, the coronavirus genomes had a tendency to shed their cytosine
—respectively guanine—complement, essentially replacing it by uracil—and guanine by adenine.
While this tendency constrains the genome as a whole, it is obvious that this will dramatically restrict the
evolutionary trajectory of the virus, presumably leading to attenuation. However, because a major component
of the antiviral innate immunity results from the production of the CTP analog ddhCTP, losing C residues in
the genome will transiently alleviate some of the negative pressure created by this antiviral response. This
may somehow account for the increase in virulence when a fairly GC-rich virus of an animal infects a foreign

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

19
host. Furthermore, local C-enrichment, resulting from inevitable template misreading, may be stabilized if the
function of the corresponding translated polypeptide contributes to the production of a larger progeny of the
virus. This makes identification of the functions associated to loci that do not readily comply with the loss of C
(and G) residues as likely candidates important for a stable virus evolutionary potential.
Immediately upon internalization of the virus, its 3’-capped RNA genome begins to be translated into two
large proteins coded from ORF1a and ORF1ab which contain a protease domain that cuts off 16 accessory
proteins required for specific functions of the virus (96). Its N-terminal domain, processed into non structural
protein Nsp1, immediately interferes with translation of the host proteins—it is also inhibiting its own
translation thus producing homeostatic regulation—by blocking the assembly of ribosomes that are in the
process of translating host mRNAs and disrupting nuclear-cytoplasmic transport (97). Subsequently a large
complex forms with all the other Nsp proteins generated from the processed precursor, generating a RNAdependent replication/transcription complex (RTC). Remarkably, this complex is tightly linked to key
elements of the translation machinery. It has been demonstrated that, besides inhibition of interferon
signalling, Nsp1 binds to the 40S ribosomal subunit (98) and that it further triggers host mRNA degradation
(99). Nsp1 binds translation factors eIF3, eIF1A, eIF1 and eIF2-tRNAi-GTP (100) and inhibits formation of
the translation initiation complex—48S complex and formation of active 80S ribosomes (101). Early
interaction with the host translation machinery will stop translation, triggering host mRNA decay, which both
produces nucleotide precursors for replication of the virus and hijacks the machinery to perform further
translation of the viral genome. This implies that the complex between Nsp1 and the translation initiation
complex is able to discriminate between different classes of mRNAs to allow or prevent their translation.
Among the factors bound to Nsp1 the enigmatic ATP-dependent enzyme ABCE1 has been identified (100).
Remarkably, this protein is expected to behave as a “Maxwell’s demon” as do proteins of the EttA family in
Bacteria, allowing partition of specific mRNA families the expression of which needs to be co-expressed or
co-repressed (102).
This role of translation is apparent in the codon usage bias of Nsp1, which differs from that of subsequent
domains cleaved off ORF1a and ORF1ab polypeptides. Here the role of arginine residue codons seems to
have been submitted to strong selection, with a majority being CGU codons, while AGA and AGG codons—
AGA translation being over-represented in the subsequent polypeptides—are totally absent from the
sequence. Also, the arginine codon CGG is extremely rare overall in the genome sequence, and its locations
are revealing, likely to be important for the co-translational folding of cognate proteins. This is particularly
important in SARS-CoV-2 as the insertion generating its furin-like cleavage site in the spike protein that
mediates cell entry (103–105) is located right at a CGG doublet. Besides protein Nsp1, we demonstrated
that the nucleocapsid protein N had also a general distribution of the codon usage bias that differed from that
of the bulk of proteins coded from the ORF1a and ORF1ab regions. This is likely to be due to the fact that
the corresponding transcripts also code for another protein in a different reading frame, protein ORF9b (106),
and we can assume that this observations substantiates that this protein has indeed an important role in the
biology of the virus. Remarkably, this also makes that the codon and tRNA usage bias of protein N
resembles that of the human host. Whether this is meaningful should be further explored.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

20
PERSPECTIVES
Here, we reviewed the role of a specific intracellular metabolic pressure that must constrain the evolution of
the genome sequence of RNA viruses, with emphasis on SARS-CoV-2 and in the context of the entire
coronavirus family. Several studies have noticed the cytosine deficiency in the genome of evolving
coronaviruses, with concomitant deficiency in the position of codons, but these observations were ascribed
to deamination of cytosine resulting from the action of the host APOBEC system (107) or to methylation of
CpG dinucleotides (108) as driving forces for evolution. By contrast, our working hypothesis is that the
availability of CTP (and hence of cytosine-based precursors) is a dominating driving force in the way the
virus evolves a new progeny. We are well aware that, due to the small number of samples and fairly short life
time (as compared to usual evolutionary trajectory of a virus species), sequence analyses would provide only
a limited view of sequence evolution and should be used more as a “rule of thumb” than a view based on
trustworthy statistics. However we believe that, in view of the urgent situation we are facing, it is important to
communicate our observations while relating them to previously unrecognised pressure that must have
considerable importance in the evolution of viruses and the metabolic backdrop of its biology in the host cell.
In this respect it seems worthwhile to explore whether unappreciated functions coded by viruses will be
involved in controlling CTP availability.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Data preparation
Dataset of reference coronaviruses: viral genomes were downloaded from GenBank
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/) and GISAID (https://www.gisaid.org/). Representative coronaviruses
of different species were selected from complete genomes, with reference genomes recommended by the
Coronaviridae Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses
(https://talk.ictvonline.org/) and NCBI retained preferentially. For viruses containing isolates from different
hosts, at least one representative strain from each host was kept. The genomes were aligned using MAFFT
v7.427 (109) and manually checked with BioEdit. Alignment of full genomic sequences were used for
phylogeny reconstruction, while the coding regions for ORF1ab were extracted for codon usage analysis.
Dataset of SARS-CoV-2: a total of 17037 SARS-CoV-2 related sequences were available from GISAID on
May 6th, 2020 (110). Only SARS-CoV-2 genomes isolated from human, with a full length over 27,000 bp, no
ambiguous sites and detailed collection date information were used for alignment. For duplicate sequences,
only the earliest isolate was kept. Sequences for 26 coding regions, including Nsp1, Nsp2, Nsp3, Nsp4,
Nsp5, Nsp6, Nsp7, Nsp8, Nsp9, Nsp10, Nsp11, Nsp12, Nsp13, Nsp14, Nsp15, Nsp16, S, ORF3a, E, M,
ORF6, ORF7a, ORF7b, ORF8, N and ORF10 were extracted for each strain, using NC_045512 as
reference. The coding sequences were checked manually to exclude those with abnormal mutations and
early stop codons. A total of 4,110 strains with all 26 coding regions of complete ORF length were retained.
After further deduplication based on the concatenated sequences comprised of the 26 ORFs, the final
dataset contained a total of 2,574 unique SARS-CoV-2 isolates.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

21
Phylogeny reconstruction
Phylogenetic tree of the 89 representative coronaviruses was inferred using the Maximum Likelihood (ML)
method implemented in IQ-TREE v1.6.12 with the GTR+F+I+G4 substitution model determined by
ModelFinder (111–113). Ultra-fast bootstrap support values were calculated from 1,000 pseudo-replicate
trees (112). Visualization of phylogenies were conducted with ggtree package (114).
Gap-based alignment
The full alignment of the 89 reference strains was used to generate a tree, using FastTree 2.1.10 (115) (with
gamma distribution and the nucleotide option on – namely with the command options -gamma -nt), on the
NGPhylogeny.fr server (116). The Jukes-Cantor model with balanced support Shimodaira-Hasegawa test
was selected (117). Total branch length was: 14.267.
Furthermore, a gap-based alignment was created, using gaps as follows: all dinucleotides were replaced
with the ‘undefined’ symbol ‘x’ and the ‘dummy’ symbols (W for 3, Y for 6 and F for 9 consecutive gaps and
the V symbol for all single gaps), leaving only single-nucleotides in-between gaps as anchor points (7% of
total). The encoding in gaps of 3/6/9 are use to emulate the importance of potential codon gaps (reflected in
the BLOSUM45 matrix). Total branch length was: 1.673.
Gap-based genome-based phylogenetic reconstruction for this group is based on the fact that, as also
mentioned recently elsewhere (118), these viruses undergo significant recombination and a large number of
nucleotide positions achieve saturation thus confounding phylogenetic signal. Tree visualization was
facilitated by IcyTree (119)
Base content calculation
Base content was calculated by dividing the occurrence of each base by the total length of the sequence.
Genomic base contents of representative coronaviruses were calculated with the full viral genome
sequences. For the base content dynamic analysis of SARS-CoV-2, base compositions were calculated
using the 2754 unique sequences concatenated by 26 ORFs.
Codon usage analysis
Codon usage analysis was conducted based on the ORF1ab region of representative coronaviruses and the
26 individual ORFs of SARS-CoV-2 strains. Relative synonymous codon usage (RSCU) value was defined
as the ratio of the observed codon usage to the expected value (120). Codons with an RSCU value of 0,
0~0.6, 0.6~1.6 or > 1.6 were regarded as not-used, under-represented, normally-used, or over-represented
(121). RSCUs for the 120,426 human coding regions were determined based on the Homo sapiens codon
usage table retrieved on 2020 June 14th from TissueCoCoPUTs (122).
Statistical analysis and plots
Statistical test, linear regression and data visualization were all conducted in R. Kruskal-Wallis test by rank
and Wilcoxon rank sum test for pairwise comparisons were applied as appropriate. P values are labeled as
follows: < 0.0001, ****; 0.0001 to 0.001, ***; 0.001 to 0.01, **; 0.01 to 0.05, *; ≥ 0.05, not labeled. p<0.05 was
considered as significant.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

22
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We warmly thank Prof. Huanming Yang, Dr. Ziqing Deng and Dr. Minfeng Xiao for their constructive
communication in study design and data interpretation. Our thanks also go to Mr. Jielun Cai and Miss Xinyi
Cheng for their assistance in data preparation. Thanks also to Pierre-Yves Bourguignon for his analysis of
the cytosine complement of the virus and to Agnieszka Sekowska for her comments on metabolic pathways.
We thank all the authors who shared genomic data in public database, and an acknowledgment table for
sequences retrieved from GISAID (110) is provided (Supplementary Table S2).
CONTRIBUTIONS
AD designed the study and wrote the bulk of the manuscript. ZO, JL and WC developed the in silico
analyses of cytosine evolution, codon usage biases and phylogeny. ZO, DW and WS performed the analysis
and ZO wrote the corresponding part of the manuscript. CO designed and performed phylogenetic studies
based on indels. PM identified the importance of several key steps in CTP synthesis. All authors read, wrote
some sections and contributed to the final version of the manuscript.
FUNDING
This work received funding by Stellate Therapeutics and the National Science and Technology Major Project
of China (No. 2017ZX10303406), the emergency grants for prevention and control of SARS-CoV-2 of
Ministry of Science and Technology (2020YFC0841400) and Guangdong province, China (2020B111107001,
2020B111108001).
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
AD is a founder of Stellate Therapeutics, a company developing applications of metabolism for prevention
and cure of neurodegenerative diseases and a founder of Virtexx, a company developing antiviral molecules.
ZO and authors from Shenzhen are employed by the BGI, a company developing applications of genome
studies. PM is a founder of Theraxen, a company developing synthetic biology approaches for drug
development. The other authors declare no conflict of interest.
REFERENCES

1. Brüssow,H. (2020) The novel coronavirus - A snapshot of current knowledge. Microb Biotechnol,
13, 607–612.
2. Jin,X., Chen,Y., Sun,Y., Zeng,C., Wang,Y., Tao,J., Wu,A., Yu,X., Zhang,Z., Tian,J., et al. (2013)
Characterization of the guanine-N7 methyltransferase activity of coronavirus nsp14 on
nucleotide GTP. Virus Res., 176, 45–52.
3. Sawicki,S.G., Sawicki,D.L. and Siddell,S.G. (2007) A Contemporary view of coronavirus
transcription. Journal of Virology, 81, 20–29.
4. Chen,Y., Liu,Q. and Guo,D. (2020) Emerging coronaviruses: Genome structure, replication, and
pathogenesis. J Med Virol, 92, 418–423.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

23
5. Danchin,A. and Marlière,P. (2020) Cytosine drives evolution of SARS-CoV-2. Environ. Microbiol.,
10.1111/1462-2920.15025.
6. Lucas-Hourani,M., Dauzonne,D., Jorda,P., Cousin,G., Lupan,A., Helynck,O., Caignard,G.,
Janvier,G., André-Leroux,G., Khiar,S., et al. (2013) Inhibition of pyrimidine biosynthesis
pathway suppresses viral growth through innate immunity. PLoS Pathog, 9, e1003678.
7. Xia,X. (2020) Extreme genomic CpG deficiency in SARS-CoV-2 and evasion of host antiviral
defense. Mol. Biol. Evol., 10.1093/molbev/msaa094.
8. Song,H.-D., Tu,C.-C., Zhang,G.-W., Wang,S.-Y., Zheng,K., Lei,L.-C., Chen,Q.-X., Gao,Y.-W.,
Zhou,H.-Q., Xiang,H., et al. (2005) Cross-host evolution of severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus in palm civet and human. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 102, 2430–
2435.
9. Moreno-Altamirano,M.M.B., Kolstoe,S.E. and Sánchez-García,F.J. (2019) Virus control of cell
metabolism for replication and evasion of host immune responses. Front Cell Infect
Microbiol, 9, 95.
10. Thompson,L.R., Zeng,Q., Kelly,L., Huang,K.H., Singer,A.U., Stubbe,J. and Chisholm,S.W.
(2011) Phage auxiliary metabolic genes and the redirection of cyanobacterial host carbon
metabolism. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 108, E757-764.
11. Hew,K., Dahlroth,S.-L., Veerappan,S., Pan,L.X., Cornvik,T. and Nordlund,P. (2015) Structure of
the varicella zoster virus thymidylate synthase establishes functional and structural
similarities as the human enzyme and potentiates itself as a target of brivudine. PLoS ONE,
10, e0143947.
12. Kutnjak,D., Elena,S.F. and Ravnikar,M. (2017) Time-sampled population sequencing reveals
the interplay of selection and genetic drift in experimental evolution of potato virus Y. J.
Virol., 91, e00690-17.
13. Arribas,M., Aguirre,J., Manrubia,S. and Lázaro,E. (2018) Differences in adaptive dynamics
determine the success of virus variants that propagate together. Virus Evol, 4, vex043.
14. Orton,R.J., Wright,C.F., King,D.P. and Haydon,D.T. (2020) Estimating viral bottleneck sizes for
FMDV transmission within and between hosts and implications for the rate of viral
evolution. Interface Focus, 10, 20190066.
15. Pratelli,A. and Colao,V. (2015) Role of the lipid rafts in the life cycle of canine coronavirus. J.
Gen. Virol., 96, 331–337.
16. Perrier,A., Bonnin,A., Desmarets,L., Danneels,A., Goffard,A., Rouillé,Y., Dubuisson,J. and
Belouzard,S. (2019) The C-terminal domain of the MERS coronavirus M protein contains a
trans-Golgi network localization signal. J. Biol. Chem., 294, 14406–14421.
17. Li,F. (2016) Structure, function, and evolution of coronavirus spike proteins. Annu Rev Virol, 3,
237–261.
18. Schoeman,D. and Fielding,B.C. (2019) Coronavirus envelope protein: current knowledge.
Virol. J., 16, 69.
19. Wellen,K.E. and Thompson,C.B. (2012) A two-way street: reciprocal regulation of metabolism
and signalling. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 13, 270–276.
20. Mayer,K.A., Stöckl,J., Zlabinger,G.J. and Gualdoni,G.A. (2019) Hijacking the supplies:

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

24
metabolism as a novel facet of virus-host interaction. Front Immunol, 10, 1533.
21. Kuo,L., Koetzner,C.A. and Masters,P.S. (2016) A key role for the carboxy-terminal tail of the
murine coronavirus nucleocapsid protein in coordination of genome packaging. Virology,
494, 100–107.
22. Woods,P.S., Doolittle,L.M., Rosas,L.E., Joseph,L.M., Calomeni,E.P. and Davis,I.C. (2016)
Lethal H1N1 influenza A virus infection alters the murine alveolar type II cell surfactant
lipidome. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol., 311, L1160–L1169.
23. Lee,J. and Ridgway,N.D. (2020) Substrate channeling in the glycerol-3-phosphate pathway
regulates the synthesis, storage and secretion of glycerolipids. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol
Cell Biol Lipids, 1865, 158438.
24. Westheimer,F.H. (1987) Why nature chose phosphates. Science, 235, 1173–8.
25. Danchin,A. (2009) Natural selection and immortality. Biogerontology, 10, 503–516.
26. Maldonado,E.N. and Lemasters,J.J. (2014) ATP/ADP ratio, the missed connection between
mitochondria and the Warburg effect. Mitochondrion, 19, 78–84.
27. Yong,J., Bischof,H., Burgstaller,S., Siirin,M., Murphy,A., Malli,R. and Kaufman,R.J. (2019)
Mitochondria supply ATP to the ER through a mechanism antagonized by cytosolic Ca2+.
eLife, 8, e49682.
28. Kanehisa,M., Furumichi,M., Tanabe,M., Sato,Y. and Morishima,K. (2017) KEGG: new
perspectives on genomes, pathways, diseases and drugs. Nucleic Acids Res, 45, D353–
D361.
29. Ahmad,M.F. and Dealwis,C.G. (2013) The structural basis for the allosteric regulation of
ribonucleotide reductase. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci, 117, 389–410.
30. Uhlin,U. and Eklund,H. (1994) Structure of ribonucleotide reductase protein R1. Nature, 370,
533–539.
31. Danchin,A. (1996) mRNA turnover and DNA synthesis: a lesson from bacterial genome
comparisons. Mol. Microbiol., 20, 895–897.
32. Danchin,A., Ouzounis,C., Tokuyasu,T. and Zucker,J.-D. (2018) No wisdom in the crowd:
genome annotation in the era of big data - current status and future prospects. Microb
Biotechnol, 11, 588–605.
33. Martin,E., Palmic,N., Sanquer,S., Lenoir,C., Hauck,F., Mongellaz,C., Fabrega,S., Nitschké,P.,
Esposti,M.D., Schwartzentruber,J., et al. (2014) CTP synthase 1 deficiency in humans
reveals its central role in lymphocyte proliferation. Nature, 510, 288–292.
34. Endrizzi,J.A., Kim,H., Anderson,P.M. and Baldwin,E.P. (2004) Crystal structure of Escherichia
coli cytidine triphosphate synthetase, a nucleotide-regulated glutamine
amidotransferase/ATP-dependent amidoligase fusion protein and homologue of anticancer
and antiparasitic drug targets. Biochemistry, 43, 6447–6463.
35. Chargaff,E. (1968) What really is DNA? Remarks on the changing aspects of a scientific
concept. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol., 8, 297–333.
36. Rocha,E.P. and Danchin,A. (2002) Base composition bias might result from competition for
metabolic resources. Trends Genet, 18, 291–4.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

25
37. Nasir,A., Kim,K.M. and Caetano-Anollés,G. (2017) Phylogenetic tracings of proteome size
support the gradual accretion of protein structural domains and the early origin of viruses
from primordial cells. Front Microbiol, 8, 1178.
38. Krupovic,M., Dolja,V.V. and Koonin,E.V. (2019) Origin of viruses: primordial replicators
recruiting capsids from hosts. Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 17, 449–458.
39. Zhang,Y., Morar,M. and Ealick,S.E. (2008) Structural biology of the purine biosynthetic
pathway. Cell. Mol. Life Sci., 65, 3699–3724.
40. Maley,G.F., Lobo,A.P. and Maley,F. (1993) Properties of an affinity-column-purified human
deoxycytidylate deaminase. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1162, 161–170.
41. Marx,A. and Alian,A. (2015) The first crystal structure of a dTTP-bound deoxycytidylate
deaminase validates and details the allosteric-inhibitor binding site. J. Biol. Chem., 290,
682–690.
42. Frances,A. and Cordelier,P. (2020) The emerging role of cytidine deaminase in human
diseases: a new opportunity for therapy? Mol. Ther., 28, 357–366.
43. Ireton,G.C., McDermott,G., Black,M.E. and Stoddard,B.L. (2002) The structure of Escherichia
coli cytosine deaminase. J. Mol. Biol., 315, 687–697.
44. Wegelin,I. (1983) Studies of pyrimidine metabolism during chick development: enzymes
involved in CMP breakdown. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. C, Comp. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 75,
391–393.
45. Schmidt,T.T., Reyes,G., Gries,K., Ceylan,C.Ü., Sharma,S., Meurer,M., Knop,M., Chabes,A. and
Hombauer,H. (2017) Alterations in cellular metabolism triggered by URA7 or GLN3
inactivation cause imbalanced dNTP pools and increased mutagenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A., 114, E4442–E4451.
46. Zauri,M., Berridge,G., Thézénas,M.-L., Pugh,K.M., Goldin,R., Kessler,B.M. and Kriaucionis,S.
(2015) CDA directs metabolism of epigenetic nucleosides revealing a therapeutic window in
cancer. Nature, 524, 114–118.
47. Ghérardi,A. and Sarciron,M.-E. (2007) Molecules targeting the purine salvage pathway in
Apicomplexan parasites. Trends Parasitol., 23, 384–389.
48. Ducati,R.G., Breda,A., Basso,L.A. and Santos,D.S. (2011) Purine salvage pathway in
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Curr. Med. Chem., 18, 1258–1275.
49. Ashihara,H., Stasolla,C., Fujimura,T. and Crozier,A. (2018) Purine salvage in plants.
Phytochemistry, 147, 89–124.
50. Villela,A.D., Sánchez-Quitian,Z.A., Ducati,R.G., Santos,D.S. and Basso,L.A. (2011) Pyrimidine
salvage pathway in Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Curr. Med. Chem., 18, 1286–1298.
51. Lüscher,A., Lamprea-Burgunder,E., Graf,F.E., de Koning,H.P. and Mäser,P. (2014)
Trypanosoma brucei adenine-phosphoribosyltransferases mediate adenine salvage and
aminopurinol susceptibility but not adenine toxicity. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist, 4, 55–
63.
52. Sekowska,A., Ashida,H. and Danchin,A. (2019) Revisiting the methionine salvage pathway and
its paralogues. Microb Biotechnol, 12, 77–97.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

26
53. Wilson,J.M., O’Toole,T.E., Argos,P., Shewach,D.S., Daddona,P.E. and Kelley,W.N. (1986)
Human adenine phosphoribosyltransferase. Complete amino acid sequence of the
erythrocyte enzyme. J. Biol. Chem., 261, 13677–13683.
54. Balendiran,G.K., Molina,J.A., Xu,Y., Torres-Martinez,J., Stevens,R., Focia,P.J., Eakin,A.E.,
Sacchettini,J.C. and Craig,S.P. (1999) Ternary complex structure of human HGPRTase,
pRpp, Mg 2+ , and the inhibitor HPP reveals the involvement of the flexible loop in substrate
binding. Protein Sci., 8, 1023–1031.
55. Li,J., Huang,S., Chen,J., Yang,Z., Fei,X., Zheng,M., Ji,C., Xie,Y. and Mao,Y. (2007)
Identification and characterization of human uracil phosphoribosyltransferase (UPRTase).
J. Hum. Genet., 52, 415–422.
56. Donini,S., Ferraris,D.M., Miggiano,R., Massarotti,A. and Rizzi,M. (2017) Structural
investigations on orotate phosphoribosyltransferase from Mycobacterium tuberculosis, a
key enzyme of the de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis. Sci Rep, 7, 1180.
57. Grolla,A.A., Miggiano,R., Di Marino,D., Bianchi,M., Gori,A., Orsomando,G., Gaudino,F.,
Galli,U., Del Grosso,E., Mazzola,F., et al. (2020) A nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferaseGAPDH interaction sustains the stress-induced NMN/NAD+ salvage pathway in the
nucleus. J. Biol. Chem., 295, 3635–3651.
58. Aldritt,S.M., Tien,P. and Wang,C.C. (1985) Pyrimidine salvage in Giardia lamblia. J. Exp. Med.,
161, 437–445.
59. Jarroll,E.L., Manning,P., Berrada,A., Hare,D. and Lindmark,D.G. (1989) Biochemistry and
metabolism of Giardia. J. Protozool., 36, 190–197.
60. Aurrecoechea,C., Brestelli,J., Brunk,B.P., Carlton,J.M., Dommer,J., Fischer,S., Gajria,B.,
Gao,X., Gingle,A., Grant,G., et al. (2009) GiardiaDB and TrichDB: integrated genomic
resources for the eukaryotic protist pathogens Giardia lamblia and Trichomonas vaginalis.
Nucleic Acids Res., 37, D526-530.
61. Hutchison,C.A., Chuang,R.-Y., Noskov,V.N., Assad-Garcia,N., Deerinck,T.J., Ellisman,M.H.,
Gill,J., Kannan,K., Karas,B.J., Ma,L., et al. (2016) Design and synthesis of a minimal
bacterial genome. Science, 351, aad6253.
62. Shin,Y., Hedglin,M. and Murakami,K.S. (2020) Structural basis of reiterative transcription from
the pyrG and pyrBI promoters by bacterial RNA polymerase. Nucleic Acids Res., 48, 2144–
2155.
63. Liu,J.-L. (2010) Intracellular compartmentation of CTP synthase in Drosophila. J Genet
Genomics, 37, 281–296.
64. Sun,Z. and Liu,J.-L. (2019) mTOR-S6K1 pathway mediates cytoophidium assembly. J Genet
Genomics, 46, 65–74.
65. Li,H., Ye,F., Ren,J.-Y., Wang,P.-Y., Du,L.-L. and Liu,J.-L. (2018) Active transport of cytoophidia
in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. FASEB J., 32, 5891–5898.
66. Chauhan,N., Farine,L., Pandey,K., Menon,A.K. and Bütikofer,P. (2016) Lipid topogenesis-35years on. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1861, 757–766.
67. McMaster,C.R. (2018) From yeast to humans - roles of the Kennedy pathway for
phosphatidylcholine synthesis. FEBS Lett., 592, 1256–1272.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

27
68. Del Caño-Ochoa,F. and Ramón-Maiques,S. (2020) The multienzymatic protein CAD leading
the de novo biosynthesis of pyrimidines localizes exclusively in the cytoplasm and does not
translocate to the nucleus. Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids,
10.1080/15257770.2019.1706743.
69. Furusho,K., Shibata,T., Sato,R., Fukui,R., Motoi,Y., Zhang,Y., Saitoh,S.-I., Ichinohe,T.,
Moriyama,M., Nakamura,S., et al. (2019) Cytidine deaminase enables Toll-like receptor 8
activation by cytidine or its analogs. Int. Immunol., 31, 167–173.
70. Cheng,M.-L., Chien,K.-Y., Lai,C.-H., Li,G.-J., Lin,J.-F. and Ho,H.-Y. (2020) Metabolic
reprogramming of host cells in response to enteroviral infection. Cells, 9, E473.
71. Drosten,C., Preiser,W., Günther,S., Schmitz,H. and Doerr,H.W. (2003) Severe acute respiratory
syndrome: identification of the etiological agent. Trends Mol Med, 9, 325–327.
72. Cui,J., Li,F. and Shi,Z.-L. (2019) Origin and evolution of pathogenic coronaviruses. Nat Rev
Microbiol, 17, 181–192.
73. Corman,V.M., Baldwin,H.J., Tateno,A.F., Zerbinati,R.M., Annan,A., Owusu,M., Nkrumah,E.E.,
Maganga,G.D., Oppong,S., Adu-Sarkodie,Y., et al. (2015) Evidence for an ancestral
association of human coronavirus 229E with bats. J. Virol., 89, 11858–11870.
74. Huynh,J., Li,S., Yount,B., Smith,A., Sturges,L., Olsen,J.C., Nagel,J., Johnson,J.B.,
Agnihothram,S., Gates,J.E., et al. (2012) Evidence supporting a zoonotic origin of human
coronavirus strain NL63. Journal of Virology, 86, 12816–12825.
75. Lau,S.K.P., Woo,P.C.Y., Li,K.S.M., Tsang,A.K.L., Fan,R.Y.Y., Luk,H.K.H., Cai,J.-P., Chan,K.-H.,
Zheng,B.-J., Wang,M., et al. (2015) Discovery of a novel coronavirus, China rattus
coronavirus HKU24, from Norway rats supports the murine origin of betacoronavirus 1 and
has Implications for the ancestor of betacoronavirus lineage A. J. Virol., 89, 3076–3092.
76. Moreno,A., Lelli,D., de Sabato,L., Zaccaria,G., Boni,A., Sozzi,E., Prosperi,A., Lavazza,A.,
Cella,E., Castrucci,M.R., et al. (2017) Detection and full genome characterization of two
beta CoV viruses related to Middle East respiratory syndrome from bats in Italy. Virol J, 14,
239.
77. Yang,X.-L., Hu,B., Wang,B., Wang,M.-N., Zhang,Q., Zhang,W., Wu,L.-J., Ge,X.-Y., Zhang,Y.-Z.,
Daszak,P., et al. (2016) Isolation and characterization of a novel bat coronavirus closely
related to the direct progenitor of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus. J. Virol.,
90, 3253–3256.
78. Tort,F.L., Castells,M. and Cristina,J. (2020) A comprehensive analysis of genome composition
and codon usage patterns of emerging coronaviruses. Virus Res., 283, 197976.
79. Zhou,H., Chen,X., Hu,T., Li,J., Song,H., Liu,Y., Wang,P., Liu,D., Yang,J., Holmes,E.C., et al.
(2020) A novel bat coronavirus closely related to SARS-CoV-2 contains natural insertions at
the S1/S2 cleavage site of the pike proteins. Current Biology, 10.1016/j.cub.2020.05.023.
80. Sekowska,A., Danchin,A. and Risler,J.L. (2000) Phylogeny of related functions: the case of
polyamine biosynthetic enzymes. Microbiology (Reading, Engl.), 146 ( Pt 8), 1815–1828.
81. Yang,D. and Leibowitz,J.L. (2015) The structure and functions of coronavirus genomic 3’ and 5’
ends. Virus Res., 206, 120–133.
82. Forsdyke,D.R. and Mortimer,J.R. (2000) Chargaff’s legacy. Gene, 261, 127–137.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

28
83. Uddin,A. and Chakraborty,S. (2017) Synonymous codon usage pattern in mitochondrial CYB
gene in pisces, aves, and mammals. Mitochondrial DNA A DNA Mapp Seq Anal, 28, 187–
196.
84. Grosjean,H. and Westhof,E. (2016) An integrated, structure- and energy-based view of the
genetic code. Nucleic Acids Res., 44, 8020–8040.
85. Danchin,A., Sekowska,A. and You,C. (2020) One-carbon metabolism, folate, zinc and
translation. Microb Biotechnol, 13, 899–925.
86. Meagher,J.L., Takata,M., Gonçalves-Carneiro,D., Keane,S.C., Rebendenne,A., Ong,H.,
Orr,V.K., MacDonald,M.R., Stuckey,J.A., Bieniasz,P.D., et al. (2019) Structure of the zincfinger antiviral protein in complex with RNA reveals a mechanism for selective targeting of
CG-rich viral sequences. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 116, 24303–24309.
87. Frias,D., Monteiro-Cunha,J.P., Mota-Miranda,A.C., Fonseca,V.S., de Oliveira,T., GalvaoCastro,B. and Alcantara,L.C.J. (2013) Human retrovirus codon usage from tRNA point of
view: therapeutic insights. Bioinform Biol Insights, 7, 335–345.
88. de Crécy-Lagard,V., Boccaletto,P., Mangleburg,C.G., Sharma,P., Lowe,T.M., Leidel,S.A. and
Bujnicki,J.M. (2019) Matching tRNA modifications in humans to their known and predicted
enzymes. Nucleic Acids Research, 47, 2143–2159.
89. Belalov,I.S. and Lukashev,A.N. (2013) Causes and implications of codon usage bias in RNA
viruses. PLoS ONE, 8, e56642.
90. Slade,A., Kattini,R., Campbell,C. and Holcik,M. (2020) Diseases associated with defects in
tRNA CCA addition. Int J Mol Sci, 21.
91. Czech,A., Wende,S., Mörl,M., Pan,T. and Ignatova,Z. (2013) Reversible and rapid transferRNA deactivation as a mechanism of translational repression in stress. PLoS Genet, 9,
e1003767.
92. Su,Z., Kuscu,C., Malik,A., Shibata,E. and Dutta,A. (2019) Angiogenin generates specific stressinduced tRNA halves and is not involved in tRF-3–mediated gene silencing. J. Biol. Chem.,
294, 16930–16941.
93. Ebrahimi,K.H., Howie,D., Rowbotham,J.S., McCullagh,J., Armstrong,F.A. and James,W.S.
(2020) Viperin, through its radical-SAM activity, depletes cellular nucleotide pools and
interferes with mitochondrial metabolism to inhibit viral replication. FEBS Lett., 594, 1624–
1630.
94. Ng,L.F.P. and Hiscox,J.A. (2018) Viperin poisons viral replication. Cell Host Microbe, 24, 181–
183.
95. Nelp,M.T., Young,A.P., Stepanski,B.M. and Bandarian,V. (2017) Human viperin causes radical
SAM-dependent elongation of Escherichia coli, hinting at Its physiological role.
Biochemistry, 56, 3874–3876.
96. Wang,L., Hu,W. and Fan,C. (2020) Structural and biochemical characterization of SADS-CoV
papain-like protease 2. Protein Sci., 29, 1228–1241.
97. Gomez,G.N., Abrar,F., Dodhia,M.P., Gonzalez,F.G. and Nag,A. (2019) SARS coronavirus
protein nsp1 disrupts localization of Nup93 from the nuclear pore complex. Biochem. Cell
Biol., 97, 758–766.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

29
98. Kamitani,W., Huang,C., Narayanan,K., Lokugamage,K.G. and Makino,S. (2009) A two-pronged
strategy to suppress host protein synthesis by SARS coronavirus Nsp1 protein. Nat. Struct.
Mol. Biol., 16, 1134–1140.
99. Narayanan,K., Ramirez,S.I., Lokugamage,K.G. and Makino,S. (2015) Coronavirus
nonstructural protein 1: Common and distinct functions in the regulation of host and viral
gene expression. Virus Research, 202, 89–100.
100. Thoms,M., Buschauer,R., Ameismeier,M., Koepke,L., Denk,T., Hirschenberger,M., Kratzat,H.,
Hayn,M., Mackens-Kiani,T., Cheng,J., et al. (2020) Structural basis for translational
shutdown and immune evasion by the Nsp1 protein of SARS-CoV-2 Molecular Biology.
101. Lokugamage,K.G., Narayanan,K., Huang,C. and Makino,S. (2012) Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome Coronavirus Protein nsp1 Is a Novel Eukaryotic Translation Inhibitor That
Represses Multiple Steps of Translation Initiation. Journal of Virology, 86, 13598–13608.
102. Boel,G., Danot,O., de Lorenzo,V. and Danchin,A. (2019) Omnipresent Maxwell’s demons
orchestrate information management in living cells. Microb Biotechnol, 12, 210–242.
103. Follis,K.E., York,J. and Nunberg,J.H. (2006) Furin cleavage of the SARS coronavirus spike
glycoprotein enhances cell-cell fusion but does not affect virion entry. Virology, 350, 358–
369.
104. Belouzard,S., Chu,V.C. and Whittaker,G.R. (2009) Activation of the SARS coronavirus spike
protein via sequential proteolytic cleavage at two distinct sites. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A., 106, 5871–5876.
105. Coutard,B., Valle,C., de Lamballerie,X., Canard,B., Seidah,N.G. and Decroly,E. (2020) The
spike glycoprotein of the new coronavirus 2019-nCoV contains a furin-like cleavage site
absent in CoV of the same clade. Antiviral Research, 176, 104742.
106. Shi,C.-S., Qi,H.-Y., Boularan,C., Huang,N.-N., Abu-Asab,M., Shelhamer,J.H. and Kehrl,J.H.
(2014) SARS-coronavirus open reading frame-9b suppresses innate immunity by targeting
mitochondria and the MAVS/TRAF3/TRAF6 signalosome. J. Immunol., 193, 3080–3089.
107. Milewska,A., Kindler,E., Vkovski,P., Zeglen,S., Ochman,M., Thiel,V., Rajfur,Z. and Pyrc,K.
(2018) APOBEC3-mediated restriction of RNA virus replication. Sci Rep, 8, 5960.
108. Wang,Y., Mao,J.-M., Wang,G.-D., Qiu,Z., Yao,Q. and Chen,K.-P. (2020) Human SARS-CoV-2
has evolved to reduce CG dinucleotide in its open reading frames In Review.
109. Katoh,K., Misawa,K., Kuma,K. and Miyata,T. (2002) MAFFT: a novel method for rapid multiple
sequence alignment based on fast Fourier transform. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 3059–3066.
110. Elbe,S. and Buckland-Merrett,G. (2017) Data, disease and diplomacy: GISAID’s innovative
contribution to global health: Data, Disease and Diplomacy. Global Challenges, 1, 33–46.
111. Nguyen,L.-T., Schmidt,H.A., von Haeseler,A. and Minh,B.Q. (2015) IQ-TREE: a fast and
effective stochastic algorithm for estimating maximum-likelihood phylogenies. Molecular
Biology and Evolution, 32, 268–274.
112. Kalyaanamoorthy,S., Minh,B.Q., Wong,T.K.F., von Haeseler,A. and Jermiin,L.S. (2017)
ModelFinder: fast model selection for accurate phylogenetic estimates. Nat. Methods, 14,
587–589.
113. Hoang,D.T., Chernomor,O., von Haeseler,A., Minh,B.Q. and Vinh,L.S. (2018) UFBoot2:

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

30
improving the ultrafast bootstrap approximation. Mol. Biol. Evol., 35, 518–522.
114. Yu,G. (2020) Using ggtree to visualize data on tree-like structures. Curr Protoc Bioinformatics,
69, e96.
115. Price,M.N., Dehal,P.S. and Arkin,A.P. (2010) FastTree 2 – approximately maximum-likelihood
trees for large alignments. PLoS ONE, 5, e9490.
116. Lemoine,F., Correia,D., Lefort,V., Doppelt-Azeroual,O., Mareuil,F., Cohen-Boulakia,S. and
Gascuel,O. (2019) NGPhylogeny.fr: new generation phylogenetic services for nonspecialists. Nucleic Acids Research, 47, W260–W265.
117. Shimodaira,H. and Hasegawa,M. (1999) Multiple comparisons of log-likelihoods with
applications to phylogenetic inference. Molecular Biology and Evolution, 16, 1114–1116.
118. Li,X., Giorgi,E.E., Marichannegowda,M.H., Foley,B., Xiao,C., Kong,X.-P., Chen,Y.,
Gnanakaran,S., Korber,B. and Gao,F. (2020) Emergence of SARS-CoV-2 through
recombination and strong purifying selection. Sci.Adv., 10.1126/sciadv.abb9153.
119. Vaughan,T.G. (2017) IcyTree: rapid browser-based visualization for phylogenetic trees and
networks. Bioinformatics, 33, 2392–2394.
120. Sharp,P.M. and Li,W.-H. (1986) An evolutionary perspective on synonymous codon usage in
unicellular organisms. J Mol Evol, 24, 28–38.
121. Uddin,A. (2017) Indices of codon usage bias. J Proteomics Bioinform, 10.
122. Kames,J., Alexaki,A., Holcomb,D.D., Santana-Quintero,L.V., Athey,J.C., HamasakiKatagiri,N., Katneni,U., Golikov,A., Ibla,J.C., Bar,H., et al. (2020) TissueCoCoPUTs: novel
human tissue-specific codon and codon-pair usage tables based on differential tissue gene
expression. J. Mol. Biol., 432, 3369–3378.
FIGURE CAPTIONS
Figure 1. Energy-driven pyrimidine-based nucleic acid metabolism
ATP is the general donor in the biosynthesis of pyrimidines. CDP, required as a precursor of dCTP synthesis
is produced by RNA turnover via hydrolysis or phosphorolysis (red arrows). RNA and DNA synthesis is driven
by pyrophosphate hydrolysis (green arrows indicate irreversible reactions). dTTP is results from a
pyrophosphate-driven reaction producing dUMP, and is finely tuned by thymidylate kinase, which makes its
immediate precursor dTDP.
Figure 2. Synthesis and salvage of pyrimidine nucleotides
Synthesis of UMP begins with orotate phosphoribosyltransferase followed by decarboxylation (brown
arrows). The anabolic pathway ends up with UTP and CTP (green arrows). Salvage of CTP stems from RNA
metabolism (red arrows) and lipid metabolism (purple arrows). Degradation and scavenging of cytosinebased nucleotides goes through uracil-based scavenging and return to the CTP biosynthetic pathway, with
cytosine deamination of intermediates as critical steps. Uracil phosphoribosyltransferase matches the role of
the orotate counterpart in the ultimate salvage of the base (blue arrow). No counterpart has been yet
identified, to our knowledge (see text), for scavenging cytosine (crossed out light blue arrow). Distribution of
relevant enzymes in H. sapiens and model bacteria is illustrated in Table 1.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

31
Figure 3: Dynamic of base composition at the coding regions of SARS-CoV-2.
The base composition of the coding regions concatenated by 26 ORFs of SARS-CoV-2 is displayed. Each
dot represents one sequence. The calculation was based on 2,574 unique SARS-CoV-2 strains isolated from
December 24th, 2010 to April 17th, 2020.
Figure 4. Alignment-derived distances of the 89 reference coronavirus genomes represented by
cladograms
A genome-based tree is generated based on the full genome sequence alignment of the group (panel A) and
a gap-based tree is created, based on insertions and deletions (indels) only (see Methods). The seven
known human coronavirus strains are highlighted by a red colour for the corresponding branches. A panel on
the right indicates the four coronavirus groups; in panel B, the two incongruent sub-groups are shown by the
same colour code with reduced opacity (alpha and beta sub-groups). For details, please see text.
Figure 5. Codon usage of SARS-CoV-2 ORFs based on the third codon position compared to human
coding regions
The 20 SARS-CoV-2 ORFs with a length of over 300 nucleotides were submitted to RSCU calculation. The
codon usage for 120,426 human coding regions was also displayed to facilitate comparison. Codons are
displayed with the first letter denoting the amino acid and the three letters following a dot representing the
codon. The four panels separate the codons according to the nucleotide located at the third codon position.
Codons that are not used (RSCU=0), under-represented (RSCU<0.6), normally utilized (RSCU ranges
between 0.6-1.6), or over-represented (RSCU>1.6) are labeled in gray, blue, ice cold and yellow,
respectively.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table S1. List of representative coronaviruses for phylogeny reconstruction and
codon usage analysis with ORF1ab
Supplementary Table S2. Acknowledgement Table for the 2,574 SARS-CoV-2 isolates retrieved from
GISAID (www.gisaid.org)
Supplementary Figure 1: Phylogeny and nucleotide composition of representative coronaviruses.
The Maximum Likelihood phylogeny (left panel) was reconstructed based on the complete genomic
sequences. Bootstrap values over 70 are displayed on nodes. Coronaviruses that infects human are
highlighted by a red dot at tip. Genus of each strain is indicated by the prefix of the taxa name. The
nucleotide composition (right panel) was calculated based on the full genome sequences.
Supplementary Figure 2: Correlation between base content of SARS-CoV-2 coding regions. The
calculation was based on 2,574 unique SARS-CoV-2 coding sequences concatenated by 26 ORFs.
Supplementary Figure 3: Details of the codon usage bias of SARS-CoV-2 ORFS viewed from the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.162933; this version posted June 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

32
human tRNA complement. The X-axis displays codons sorted by amino acid and then by tRNA usage. The
Y-axis indicates the mean RSCU value determined for each ORF or the human total coding sequences.
Codons using the same tRNA are labeled with the same color.
Supplementary Figure 4: Phylogeny and codon usage of representative coronaviruses
A Maximum Likelihood phylogeny (left panel) was reconstructed based on complete genomic sequences of
coronaviruses. Bootstrap values over 70 are displayed on nodes. Coronaviruses that infect human are
highlighted by a red dot. The genus of each strain is indicated by the prefix of the taxon name. The codon
usage (right panel) was calculated based on the ORF1ab region as recorded at GenBank, except for those
with incomplete annotations. The X-axis displays codons sorted by the third position, with the first letter
denoting the amino acid and the three letters suffix following a dot representing the codon. Codons that are
under-represented (RSCU<0.6), normally utilized (RSCU ranges between 0.6-1.6), or over-represented
(RSCU>1.6) are labeled in blue, ice cold and yellow, respectively.

