bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

1

article

A comparative survey of Betacoronavirus binding dynamics relevant
to the functional evolution of the highly transmissible SARS-CoV-2
variant N501Y

Patrick Rynkiewicz1, Gregory A. Babbitt1*, Feng Cui1, André O. Hudson1, Miranda L. Lynch2
1

Thomas H. Gosnell School of Life Sciences, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester NY,
USA 14623
2Hauptmann-Woodward

Medical Research Institute, Buffalo NY, USA 14203

*corresponding email - gabsbi@rit.edu

Running title – comparative betacoronavirus binding dynamics

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

2

ABSTRACT
Comparative functional analysis of the binding interactions between various Betacoronavirus
mutant strains and their potential multiple human target proteins is crucial for a more
complete understanding of zoonotic spillovers of viruses that cause diseases like COVID-19.
Here, employing hundreds of replicate sets of nanosecond scale GPU accelerated molecular
dynamics simulations, we statistically compare atom motions of ACE2 and CD26 target proteins
in both the presence and absence of different strains of the viral receptor binding domain (RBD)
of the S spike glycoprotein. In all strains, we demonstrate a universally conserved functional
binding signature of the viral RBD with the N-terminal helices of ACE2. We also identify a
second more dynamically transient interaction of the viral N501 with the previously confirmed
ACE2 K353 and two nearby novel sites, Q325 and the AAQPFLL 386-92 motif. We propose a
model of the functional evolution of SARS-type zoonotic spillovers involving both (A) a
conserved binding interaction with the N-terminal helices of ACE2 that is preadapted from viral
interaction of the Tylonycteris bat coronavirus progenitor strain HKU4 with the SAMLI 291-5
motif in protein CD26 and (B) a more promiscuous and likely more evolvable interaction
between viral N501 and the above-mentioned multiple regions of ACE2 that is preadapted from
the bat viral interaction at the CD26 SS 333-4 motif. Our recent analysis of the highly
transmissible N501Y lineage B.1.1.7 mutation in SARS-CoV-2 also supports this model,
identifying a less promiscuous Y501 interaction with ACE2 that favors more stable functional
binding with the K353 site alone.
KEYWORDS Molecular dynamics, molecular evolution, viral binding, COVID 19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

3

INTRODUCTION
In the ongoing world-wide COVID-19 pandemic there has been an unprecedented
wealth of high-throughput sequencing surveillance of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and near live-time
sequence-based analysis of the evolution of local viral strains. Sequence-based analysis can be
highly insightful for detailing the phylogenetic history of viral strains. However, it is often
difficult to ascertain the functional aspects of this rapid viral evolution without expensive and
time-consuming functional binding assays that often need to follow highly specific biosafety
level protocols when used with human pathogens (e.g. ELISA-based and solid phase assays for
receptor binding specificity as well as microcalorimetry to quantify binding affinity). These
functional assays can be aimed at identifying and quantifying the functional repercussions of
single non-neutral variants from among the many more neutral variants generated in the
normal process of rapid viral evolution. And they can be supplemented by sequence-based
phylogenetic tests of selection as well as crystallography and computational structuralfunctional analyses. However, even when combined, these methods are still often incapable of
fully deciphering the precise molecular functions that underlie viral transmission. Ultimately
viral transmission is the consequence of soft-matter dynamics responding to weak chemical
bonding interactions at many potential sites on both the viral and putative target proteins.
Here, we present a systematic approach to the comparative statistical analysis of the dynamic
motions of proteins generated from accelerated all-atom molecular dynamics simulations that
is subsequently leveraged to offer a characterization the functional binding signatures of viral
strains on specific target proteins at single amino acid site resolution. The unprecedented
pandemic of SARS-CoV-2 brings with it many questions regarding its functional evolution of
both emergent and endemic strains in humans. And with the current surveillance of new
variants like the highly transmissible N501Y strain that has caused recent lockdowns in the
winter of 2020-21 in southeast England, our comparative physical analysis of protein binding
can offer a new perspective on the functional consequences of viral evolution during a
pandemic.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus belongs to the class of positive-strand RNA viruses (genus
Betacoronavirus) and is structurally defined by a nucleocapsid interior surrounded by the spike,
membrane, and envelope proteins (Haan et al. 2000; Fung and Liu 2019). Structural membrane
and envelope proteins are known to play a key role in virion assembly and budding from
infected cells, making them potential targets for antiviral treatments (Haan et al. 2000). One
prominent protein candidate for comparative studies of the propensity for viral transmission is
the spike or S glycoprotein, which is responsible for initial viral contact with the target host
receptor and subsequent entry into host cells. The spike protein consists of two homotrimeric
functional subunits: the S1 subunit consisting of the viral receptor binding domain (RBD)
interacting directly with the host, and the S2 subunit which directly fuses the virion to the host

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

4

cellular membrane (Hoffmann et al. 2018; Shang et al. 2020). The S1 and S2 subunits of
coronaviruses are cleaved and subsequently activated by type-II transmembrane serine
proteases and the subtilisin-like serine protease furin, the latter of which evidently primes
SARS-CoV-2 for cellular entry but not SARS-CoV-1 (Follis et al. 2006; Shang et al. 2020). The
boundary between the S1 and S2 subunits forms an exposed loop in human coronaviruses
SARS-CoV-2, hCoV-OC43, hCoV-HKU1, and MERS-CoV that is not found in SARS-CoV-1
(Hoffmann et al. 2020) and suggests a complex evolutionary landscape for emergent SARS-type
coronaviruses.
The spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 has been demonstrated to directly and specifically
target the human angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor, which has a role in the
renin–angiotensin system (RAS) critical for regulating cardiovascular and renal functions (Oudit
et al. 2003; Ou et al. 2017; Ou et al. 2020). ACE2 is a glycoprotein consisting of 805 amino acid
residues that is the primary target for docking and viral entry in many coronavirus infections,
including those belonging to SARS-CoV and human alpha-coronavirus NL63 (Hofmann et al.
2005). ACE2 is classified as a zinc metallopeptidase (carboxypeptidase) involved in cleaving a
single amino acid residue from angiotensin I (AngI) to generate Ang1-9 (Kuba et al. 2005). In
addition, ACE2 also cleaves a single amino acid residue from angiotensin II (Ang II) to generate
Ang1-7 (Kuba et al. 2005). ACE2 receptors reside on the surfaces of multiple epithelial cells,
with tissue distribution predominantly in the lung and gut linings, but are also found in heart,
kidney, liver and blood vessel tissues. Given the dominant role ACE2 plays in SARS-CoV-2 viral
entry, understanding how sequence and structural variations affect the molecular dynamics of
ACE2/RBD interactions can provide information to guide the rationale design and development
of therapeutics targeting this interaction. But it is important to note that SARS-CoV-2 also
targets other human protein receptors including several neurolipins (Cantuti-Castelvetri et al.
2020; Daly et al. 2020) and perhaps the known targets of other viral relatives such as the MERSCoV target protein CD26. Therefore, it is important to demonstrate at a molecular level, how
such promiscuity in binding interaction is achieved by the viral RBD and how it may have
contributed to zoonotic spillovers from other species to humans. The comparative dynamic
modeling of present, past, and potential progenitor viral strain interactions to ACE2 and other
known targets of past outbreaks like protein CD26, can also potentially illuminate the dynamics
of molecular interactions that may facilitate zoonotic transmission to humans as well as the
molecular evolution toward emergent and endemic human viral strains.
A powerful tool for in silico analysis of protein-protein interactions is all atom
accelerated molecular dynamics (aMD) simulation, which attempts to accurately sample the
physical trajectories of molecular structures over time via traditional Newtonian mechanics
played out over a modified potential energy landscape that encourages conformational
transition states (Pierce et al. 2012). Protein structures determined via x-ray crystallography
have previously been used to provide insights into viral evolution by comparing angstrom scale

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

5

distances and conformational similarities. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are
increasingly broadening these methods of inquiry by allowing further analysis of the rapid time
scale dynamics of protein-protein interactions. MD simulations have already been employed to
map the hydrogen bonding topology of the SARS-CoV-2 RBD/ACE2 interaction, to explore the
merits of drug repurposing, to characterize mutations, and to determine the stability of binding
interactions between the SARS-CoV-2 RBD and several contemporary antiviral drugs (Ahamad
et al. 2020; Al-Khafaji et al. 2020; Mittal et al. 2020; Muralidharan et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020;
Yu et al. 2020). While conventional MD and aMD simulations can provide unprecedented
resolution on protein motion over time, interpretations based upon comparisons of single MD
trajectories are statistically problematic and difficult to compare. This makes the application of
MD to comparative questions regarding functional binding or impacts of mutation quite
challenging. Given recent increases in GPU processor power, the statistical comparison of large
replicates of aMD simulations is now an available solution to this problem. Because MD
trajectories of complex structures like proteins are inherently complex and chaotic, even if they
are adequately resampled, they do not often fit traditional model assumptions of many
parametric statistical tests. Therefore, reliable comparisons of molecular dynamics need to
further be based upon statistical methods that can capture the multimodal distribution space of
protein motion and assign statistical significance for divergence in dynamics without overreliance on the assumptions of normality in the distribution of molecular dynamics over time.
Here we employ DROIDS 3.0, a method and software tool designed to address these
challenges in the statistical analysis and visualization of comparative protein dynamics (Babbitt
et al. 2018; Babbitt et al. 2020), to subsequently analyze hybrid models of different
betacoronavirus strain S spike glycoprotein interactions with their human target proteins.
DROIDS software employs a relative entropy (or Kullback-Leibler divergence) calculation on
atom fluctuation distributions derived from large numbers of replicates of MD trajectories to
quantify the local differences in both the magnitude and shape of the distribution of atom
fluctuations in two different functional states of a protein. In this application, we compare viral
bound versus unbound dynamics of target proteins to ascertain a computational signature of
the local degree of dampened target protein motions during viral binding. DROIDS software
also employs a non-parametric two sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistical test of significance,
subsequently corrected for false discovery rates, to identify where these dampened dynamics
upon viral binding are truly and locally significant. First, we characterize the interaction of SARSCoV-2 Spike protein with human ACE2 both with and without the recently evolved and highly
transmissible N501Y variant responsible for recent lockdowns in southeast England. Then, we
also analyze models of emergent, endemic and zoonotic coronavirus strains in humans to gain
more evolutionary perspective on the functional molecular dynamics of coronavirus viral entry
into human host cells. We believe this comparative perspective on viral binding dynamics helps
to shed light on evolutionarily conserved protein interactions that have primed certain protein

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

6

targets for zoonotic spillover events. Our profiles of binding dynamics include the endemic
human strains of betacoronavirus (hCoV-OC43 and hCoV-HKU1), emergent strains responsible
for recent SARS-like outbreaks (i.e. SARS-CoV-1, SARS-CoV-2 and MERS-CoV), as well as models
of hypothetical interactions with the bat progenitor strain bat CoV-HKU4. We confirm
important key sites of binding interaction at the ACE2 N-terminal helices and K353 identified
previously by Yan et al. (Yan et al. 2020) and identify two new key ACE2 interaction sites with
the viral N501 that exhibit a promiscuous dynamic interplay along with the K353 site with
important implications for binding propensity and binding promiscuity in relation to zoonotic
coronavirus outbreaks. Importantly, we demonstrate that the new N501Y variant (lineage
B.1.1.7) has lost this promiscuous binding in favor of a much more static and stable interaction
with K353 alone. Lastly, we present a model of the functional evolution of the binding
interactions that facilitate bat to human zoonotic spillover, including how they have changed in
both human endemic and emergent viral strains.
RESULTS
Characterization of the SARS-CoV-2 to ACE2 binding signatures in the original and N501Y
mutant strain
The modeled region of binding interaction consisted of the extracellular domain region
of human ACE2, and the viral RBD specified in Fig 1A. The main key sites of the ACE2 interface
with the viral RBD are shown in Fig 1B, with the N-terminal helices labeled in green and the
three main sites that can potentially interact with the viral RBD N501 site are shown in
magenta. The DROIDS pipeline (Babbitt et al. 2018; Babbitt et al. 2020) used to characterize the
changes in ACE2 molecular dynamics due to viral binding is summarized Fig 1C. More details
about this can be found in the methods section here as well as in our two software notes cited
above. All the binding models developed and analyzed in this study are listed in Table 1.
Comparisons of the molecular dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 RBD bound ACE2 to unbound ACE2 after
long range equilibration revealed extensive dampening of atom fluctuations (shown color
mapped in blue) at the ACE2 N-terminal helices as well as three downstream sites on ACE2
focused at Q325, K353, and a novel motif AAQPFLL 386-92 (Fig 2A-C). These color mapped
structures show the local site-wise mathematical divergence protein backbone atom fluctuation
(i.e. root mean square fluctuation averaged over N, C, Cα, and O) when comparing viral bound
ACE2 dynamics to unbound ACE2 dynamics. They are presented for both the whole structural
model (Fig 2A) and the viral binding interface with ACE2 (Fig 2B) along with sequence-based
positional plotting of the signed symmetric Kullback-Leibler or KL divergence (Fig 2C). The sitewise positional profiles of average atom fluctuation in both the viral bound and unbound states
(Fig S1), as well as the multiple test-corrected statistical significance of these KL divergences
determined by a two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov or KS test is also given (Fig S2). NOTE: the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

7

false discovery rate for the p-value adjustment of each test was determined using the
Benjamini-Hochberg method to adjust for the fact that a separate p-value is generated for each
amino acid in the sequence. Therefore, the p-value given at each site is adjusted for the
probability of false discovery that is governed by the length of the polypeptide. An identical
characterization of the ACE2 binding signature created by the much more transmissible SARSCoV-2 N501Y mutant indicated a similar profile at the N-terminal helices, with more attraction
to the C helix (Fig 2D-E). However, the binding to the ACE2 K353 by the viral RBD Y501 was far
more stable while the former promiscuous interactions with Q325 and AAQPFLL 386-92 were
far more markedly reduced (Fig 2D-E, with point of the viral RBD mutation N501Y marked by
the green star).
Characterization of binding signatures of the bat progenitor strain HKU4 with its primary
target CD26 and potential zoonotic spillover target ACE2
Binding interaction models of Tylonycteris bat progenitor strain batCoV-HKU4 RBD in
complex with CD26 (its normal target) and ACE2 were also analyzed in the same manner as
SARS-CoV-2 (Fig 3). The bat coronavirus HKU4 was strongly and significantly dampened
molecular motion in two precise regions of CD26, the SAMLI 291-295 motif, and double serine
motif at SS-333-4 (Fig 3A-C). However, upon interacting with ACE2, the bat coronavirus RBD
only dampened the atom fluctuation at a broader region of the ACE2 N-terminal helices (Fig 3DE) utilizing the same region that interacts with the CD26 SAMLI motif. Thus, the interaction with
the ACE2 N-terminal helix appears pre-adapted by the evolution of the interaction with SAMLI
on CD26. The site-wise atom fluctuation profiles and KS tests of significance of the differences
in these fluctuations are also given (Fig S3).
Survey of other coronavirus binding signatures in human endemic strains and past emergent
outbreaks
Binding interaction models of human endemic strains hCoV-OC43 and hCoV-HKU1 in
complex with ACE2 were also analyzed identically to previous models. The interaction with the
most pathologically benign and longest co-evolved strain hCoV-OC43 (Fig 4A-C) shows highly
enhanced dampened motion due to binding only at the N-terminal helices of ACE2, while the
interaction with hCoV-HKU1 demonstrates this as well, but also adds moderate promiscuous
interactions of N501 with K353 and Q325 (Fig 4D-E). The enhanced binding at the N-terminal
helix is clearly associated with the evolution of extended loop structure of the viral RBD at this
region of the interface (Fig 4A). The site-wise atom fluctuation profiles and KS tests of
significance of the differences in these fluctuations are also given (Fig S1 C-D and S2 C-D).
Binding interaction models of past human outbreak strain MERS-CoV in complex with both
CD26 and ACE2 (Fig 5) indicate a two-touch interaction with the same CD26 sites as observed
with bat CoV-HKU4 binding (i.e. SAMLI 291-5 and SS 333-4) but with an even larger interaction

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

8

with the several sites just downstream of the double serine motif. The MERS-CoV interaction
with ACE2 indicates a strong interaction with the N-terminal helices and only a weak interaction
with K353. Binding interaction models of past human outbreak strain SARS-CoV-1 in complex
with ACE2 (Fig. 6) indicates that the binding signature of SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 are nearly
identical with both having stable interaction with N-terminal helices of ACE2 and promiscuous
interactions with K353 and the same novel sites q325 and AAQPFLL 386-92. Again, the sitewise atom fluctuation profiles and KS tests of significance of the differences in these
fluctuations are also given (Fig S1 C-F and S2 C-F).
Summary of the comparative protein dynamic surveys
In comparisons of molecular dynamics simulations between four strains of humanpathogenic coronaviruses, SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV-1, HKU1, and OC43, all four RBDs were
associated with statistically significant dampening of molecular motion in the N-terminal helices
of human ACE2, indicated by blue color mapping corresponding to a negative Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence on the ACE2 PDB structure mapped at single amino acid resolution (Figures 25). With the exceptions of bat CoV-HKU4 and hCoV-OC43, all RBDs were also associated with
dampened molecular motion of ACE2 at residue K353. The absence of a secondary interaction
between OC43 and ACE2 is further supported by multiple sequence alignment of the RBD loop
region proximal to the K353 site, where OC43 is the only surveyed strain with a polar uncharged
threonine residue in place of a small aliphatic residue (Fig. S4). A significant dampening effect is
also present in two novel sites near to K353, the Q325 and 386-AAQPFLL-392 motif, when
interacting with SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 (Fig. 2 A-C and Fig. 6 A-C), indicating a transiently
dynamic or promiscuous interaction of the viral RBD with these three key ACE2 binding sites. In
the recent evolution of the far more transmissible N501Y variant, the loss of this promiscuous
RBD binding interaction with sites Q325, K353, and 386-AAQPFLL-392 in ACE2 in favor of a
more stable K353 interaction highlights an important molecular explanation that linking
population transmission rate with the evolution of increased binding specificity in this new
variant. Not much is yet published about this new variant, however ongoing updates can be
found at the following link
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Rapid increase of a SARS-CoV-2 variant
with multiple spike protein mutations observed in the United Kingdom – 20 December 2020.
ECDC: Stockholm; 2020.
In silico Mutagenesis Study of hACE2 and SARS-CoV-2 Bound Dynamics
To confirm the relative importance of the three promiscuous sites in the binding
interaction of coronavirus RBDs to human ACE2, eight total in silico targeted mutagenesis
studies were performed, on ACE2 and the viral RBD alone (Table 2). K353A, a mutation

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

9

previously identified to abolish SARS-CoV-1 RBD interaction with ACE2, neutralized dampening
of the N-terminal helices during binding with the SARS-CoV-2 RBD (Fig. S7) supporting the
observation of decreased infectivity in the mutant (Li et al. 2005). Within the newly identified
386-AAQPFLL-392 motif, a mutation of the nonpolar N-terminal double alanine to the charged
polar glutamic acid resulted in an additional strong dampening of molecular motion in the
ancestral Q325 site, with a KL divergence of less than -3 between the unbound and bound
states (Fig. S8A). Mutating the C-terminal FLL residues to EEE in the 386-AAQPFLL-392 motif
resulted in no overall change to the binding characteristics between the SARS-CoV-2 RBD and
ACE2 (Fig. S8B). Upon mutating V739 in ACE2 to hydrophilic glutamate, the N-terminal helix
region and 386-AAQPFLL-392 motif showed no significant change in molecular motion between
bound and unbound states (Fig. S9A). This same pattern of binding characteristics could be seen
in the mutation of V185 to glutamate in the loop region of the SARS-CoV-2 RBD, proximal to
ACE2 during binding (Fig. S10A). Mutating V185 to leucine in the RBD resulted in the same
binding characteristics, resulting in a pattern of dampening in molecular motion that was the
same as seen in SARS-CoV-1 (Fig. S10B). All surveyed mutations maintained significant
dampening in K353 of ACE2 during binding. The mutation of V739 in ACE2 to leucine resulted in
dampening of Q325 in the interaction, as is seen in SARS-CoV-1, and a lack of dampening in the
AAQPFLL motif as seen in the SARS-CoV-2 wild type (Fig. S9B). However, mutating V739 in ACE2
to glutamate resulted in pronounced dampening only at the N-terminal helices and K353. Upon
mutating polar K408 in the SARS-CoV-2 RBD to nonpolar alanine, the Q325 interaction
disappeared and only interactions with N-terminal helices, K353, and 382-AAQPFLL-392
remained (Fig. S11).
Building a Model for Key ACE2 Binding Regions in Interactions with Coronavirus Receptor
Binding Domains
Based on our results comparing regions of dampened molecular motion in ACE2 and
CD26 target proteins across zoonotic, emergent, and endemic betacoronavirus strains, we
propose a model of protein interaction for coronavirus RBD evolution and human specificity
highlighting the role of the two distinct touch points between the viral RBD and the human
target proteins (Fig. 7A). The black arrowhead in the model signifies a conserved region of
sustained interaction between the coronavirus RBDs and the N-terminal helix region of ACE2.
The red arrowhead indicates more promiscuous interactions with Q325 and K353, present
individually across SARS-CoV-2 as well as SARS-CoV-1, MERS, and HKU1, as well as the newly
identified 386-AAQPFLL-392 motif prominent only in the wild-type SARS-type spike protein
RBD. This two-touch model highlights a common interaction point of the viral RBD with the Nterminal helices of ACE2 that is conserved in all known strains of potentially human-interacting
betacoronavirus, demonstrated by the universal dampening of ACE2 molecular motions upon
viral binding. This interaction corresponds structurally with the viral bat progenitor strain RBD

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

10

interaction with the SAMLI 291-5 site in CD26. The second and more complex dynamic touch
point in the model involves the contact of the viral RBD N501 with the previously described
contact site K353, as well as the two nearby novel sites of interaction reported above. It
corresponds with the viral bat progenitor strain interaction with SS 333-4 in CD26. This
promiscuous interaction site seems considerably apparent in the two pathogenic SARS-type
strains, suggesting that the binding interactions during zoonotic spillover may follow a common
functional evolutionary path (Fig. 7B), utilizing a preadapted interaction with the SAMLI motif in
CD26 to establish binding with the ACE2 N-terminal helices in bat reservoir populations that
quickly establishes a ‘slippery’ two touch binding interaction that allows promiscuous binding in
SARS-type emergent strains shortly after zoonotic spillover. In SARS-CoV-2, this has most
recently evolved to higher specificity for ACE2 through the strengthening of the ACE2 K353
interaction. This appears quite different from the evolutionary path of the binding interactions
in human endemic strains like hCoV-OC43 (Fig.7B), where an insertion event appears to have
enhanced the loop structures near the N-terminal helices of ACE2 and subsequently strengthen
binding interactions in this region.
DISCUSSION
Here we conducted statistical comparisons of hundreds of replicate sets of nanosecond
scale GPU accelerated molecular dynamics simulations on viral bound and unbound target
proteins in an effort to survey various emergent, endemic, and potentially zoonotic
Betacoronavirus strains in humans. We present evidence that strongly suggests a common
route of functional molecular evolution occurring at the binding interface of the viral receptor
binding domain and their primary protein targets ACE2 and CD26. We propose a two-touch
model of viral evolution that may be evolving similarly during SARS-type betacoronavirus
zoonotic spillover events from Tylonycteris bat to human populations. We present
computationally derived signatures of receptor binding domain interactions with target human
proteins, in the Tylonycteris bat progenitor strain batCoV-HKU4 and five human strains, the
emergent MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 strains and the endemic hCoV-OC43 and
hCoV-HKU1 strains. Our studies of the physics of viral binding at single amino acid site
resolution demonstrate that the coronavirus spike glycoprotein receptor binding domain (RBD)
has a strong, static, and well-defined binding interaction occurring in two distinct regions, or
“touch points” of human CD26 (also likely the CD26 ortholog in bats as well). In its interactions
with the human ACE2 target protein, the spike glycoprotein RBD appears pre-adapted through
its binding interaction involving one of these sites, the SAMLI 291-5 motif on CD26, to further
allow broad binding interactions with the whole N-terminal helical region of ACE2. This
preadaptation to binding ACE2 N-terminal helices appears common to all betacoronavirus
strains we have examined and is very well demonstrated by dampened molecular motion in all

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

11

our simulations. The prevalence of the ACE2 N-terminal helix interactions among all our human
and bat progenitor viral strain models leads us to believe that this is pre-adapted binding
interaction may be a key prerequisite interaction for zoonotic spillovers serving as a physical
anchor, or primary “touch point” that allows further evolution of various coronavirus RBD
interaction with ACE2 in humans. In both SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2, and to a lesser extent in
the human coronavirus strain, hCoV-HKU1, we identify three key binding sites in ACE2 that have
complex and perhaps transient dynamic interactions with the N501 RBD site in the early stages
of this evolution. Interactions at all three of these sites are clearly evidenced by our
comparative statistical method applied to molecular dynamics. These three sites in ACE2 are
the previously implicated K353 site (Yan et.al 2020) as well as two new novel flanking sites at
Q325 and 386-AAQPFLL-392. When the viral RBD appears to transiently interact with these
three residues, we refer to this interaction as forming a “slippery touch point” during RBD
binding (Fig. 7B). This interaction is not apparent in simulations on the bat progenitor strain
batCoV-HKU4, on the endemic hCoV-OC43, nor the MERS-CoV interactions with ACE2 (NOTE:
the MERS primary human target protein was CD26). This transient viral RBD interaction with
multiple sites on ACE2 in emergent SARS-type strains suggests that the interaction with K353
reported by (Yan et al. 2020), is not as stable as their initial structural analysis might imply. We
hypothesize that the binding interactions at these three sites are perhaps more evolvable in
SARS-type strains than the interactions at the N-terminal helices. The recent appearance of the
highly transmissible N501Y (lineage B.1.1.7) variant in southeast England during the winter of
2020-21 appears to further support the functional evolution of more stable binding at this same
location on the ACE2 target protein. When we characterized the effect of the mutation on the
binding dynamics in this region, we found that this one mutation has greatly stabilized the Y501
interaction with the ACE2 K353 site and reduced the transient and promiscuous interactions
with the other two flanking binding sites. Thus, the stabilization of two touch points in the RBD
binding has enhanced the binding stability, and by extension perhaps also the transmissibility of
the SARS-CoV-2 virus, bringing it much closer to the molecular binding profile of the bat
progenitor strain batCoV-HKU4 with its primary target protein, CD26. Interestingly, the human
endemic strain hCoV-OC43 appears to have evolved towards enhanced stability on ACE2 via a
quite different mechanism, losing this second touch point altogether in favor of a strong broad
interaction with the ACE2 N-terminal helices that is facilitated by the evolution of enhanced
loop structures on the viral RBD near its interface at this first touch point on ACE2. The slightly
more pathogenic human strain hCoV-HKU1 also shows shares this feature with hCoV-OC43, but
still also shows weak interactions with K353.
It has been recently hypothesized and demonstrated that promiscuity in protein-protein
interactions is related to a lack of protein stability (Cohen-Khait et al. 2017) and it would also
appear, through our work on this system, that a lack of protein stability may also be related to

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

12

the molecular facilitation of zoonotic spillovers of certain viral pathogens as well. We believe
the complex dynamic interaction at the second ‘slippery touch point’ in our two-touch model
may represent the molecular manifestation of a lack of binding specificity that may characterize
many viral binding interactions during emergent SARS-type outbreaks when the co-evolution
between a viral binding domain and a potential host target receptor is still historically very
recent. Our simulations suggest several alternative paths of viral evolution in emergent versus
endemic strains that have both favored a more precise and specific targeting of human ACE2,
which may also be associated with enhanced transmissibility as well.
While our approach offers the considerable advantage of combining a comparative
statistical method and a physics-based modeling approach towards addressing functional
molecular evolution, it is not without some pitfalls. Some potential limitations of MD
simulations as a probative method for functional molecular evolution are its many implicit
simplifying computational assumptions, its complex and inherently stochastic nature, and vary
high computational expense (i.e. due to femtosecond time steps). Specifically, computational
sampling of even the accelerated MD method employed here has strict hardware limitations,
and even on modern graphics cards our simulations can typically have a cumulative runtime of
several weeks to generate the proper statistical replication to compare physical time frames of
only several hundreds of nanoseconds. In addition, MD simulations always involve some
simplification of physics within the system being studied as it invariably ignores atomic charge
regulation, bond motions in the solvent, charge screening during interaction, and other
macromolecular crowding effects. Insight into long-term micro-millisecond dynamics in large
explicit solvent systems are still limited by currently available hardware, even when creative
algorithms for accelerating MD simulations are used.
Glycosylation is another aspect of coronavirus spike protein biology that is not fully
captured by our MD simulations, mainly due to lack of glycosylation in the functional binding
interface of most of our key starting structures. We would argue that while these posttranslational modifications can have in immediate impacts on dynamics, their probably lack of
heritability may also minimize their role during viral evolution during outbreaks. In SARS-CoV-1,
MERS-CoV, and hCoV-HKU1, there are 8 to 9 known N-linked glycosylation amino-acid sequins
which aid in immune evasion (Turoňová et al. 2020; Watanabe, Allen, et al. 2020; Watanabe,
Berndsen, et al. 2020; Yao et al. 2020) however their consistent heritability within viral
populations during epidemics remains yet to be documented. Viral spike proteins are known to
be extensively glycosylated to facilitate immune evasion in a process known as glycan shielding
(Bagdonaite and Wandall 2018; Casalino et al. 2020). The full SARS-CoV-2 spike protein has
been determined to contain 22 potential N-linked glycan sequons across each full length
protomer (Watanabe, Allen, et al. 2020). Various expression systems and recombinant
techniques have been employed for determining the potential occupancy and antigenicity of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

13

coronavirus glycan sequons, providing an overview of potentially functionally meaningful
glycosylation sites but not comprehensively reviewing their presence in clinical samples
(Watanabe, Allen, et al. 2020). Our study focuses on the conformational shielded receptor
binding domain, which in both MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 has been predicted to have only one
to two N-glycosylation sites, significantly fewer than the rest of the spike protomer (Watanabe,
Allen, et al. 2020; Watanabe, Berndsen, et al. 2020). Recent mapping of glycosylation sites in
SARS-CoV-2 (Yao et al. 2020) also confirms only one site of RBD glycosylation (at N343) falling
within our modeling region (i.e. sites 335-518) and which is far removed from the ACE2
interface and the site of the N501Y mutation. Nevertheless, glycosylation sites proximal to the
SARS-CoV-2 RBD have been implicated in stabilizing the RBD hinge, but the potential functional
importance of glycans at the interface of the viral RBD and human ACE2, and particularly their
consistent heritability at the population-level, remain largely unknown. And while glycans are
perhaps very important to understanding the extreme variation in clinical presentations of
COVID-19, given that they are most likely non-heritable secondary modifications of structure
during viral evolution, and are largely absence within the ACE2-RBD binding interface (Ke et al.
2020), we can justify having excluded them in our evolutionary studies of comparative
molecular dynamics in emergent and endemic human betacoronavirus strains.
Despite these limitations, we conclude that our identification of additional key residues
in the binding interaction between the SARS-CoV-2 RBD and human ACE2 receptor, as well as
our evolutionary exploration of the two-touch model of RBD evolution provide a conceptual
framework for future functional mutagenesis studies of this system. This will be especially
important for understanding the functional evolution of transmissibility in new variants like
N501Y, recently responsible for the large community lockdowns during the COVID-19 pandemic
in southeast England in late 2020. Future surveys of Betacoronavirus circulating in past,
present, and future human populations as well as molecular and clinical investigations of SARSCoV-2 infection will likely continue to be further informed by the model interpretation of
binding interaction that we present in this study. In future studies of computational models
derived from potential zoonotic coronavirus strains, our binding model can lend greater
interpretability to observations regarding evolutionary diversity in coronaviruses infecting
reservoir species like bats, birds, and small mammals. Finally, as recent work has called out the
importance of specific molecular motions in forming novel therapeutic targets for intervention
in emerging zoonotic spillover events (Pierri 2020), tools for highlighting functionally conserved
dynamics of conformational alterations of the interaction host and pathogen proteins will prove
a valuable addition to the arsenal of modeling approaches available for drug development.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

14

MATERIALS AND METHODS
PDB structure and hybrid model preparation
Structures of the two main human SARS variants of beta-coronavirus spike glycoprotein
receptor binding domain (RBD) bound to human ACE2 receptor protein were obtained from the
Protein Data Bank (PDB). These were SARS-CoV-1 (PDB: 6acg) (Song et al. 2018) and SARS-CoV-2
(PDB: 6m17) (Yan et al. 2020). Three additional hybrid models of viral RBD interaction with
ACE2 consisting of human betacoronavirus variants MERS-CoV (PDB: 5x5c, and PDB 4kr0) (Yuan
et al. 2017), hCoV-OC43 (PDB: 6ohw) (Tortorici et al. 2019), and hCoV-HKU1 (PDB: 5gnb) (Ou et
al. 2017) bound to ACE2 were generated by creating an initial structural alignment to the SARSCoV-2 RBD/ACE2 model (PDB: 6m17) using UCSF Chimera’s MatchMaker superposition tool
(Pettersen et al. 2004) followed by deletion of the SARS-CoV-2 RBD in the model and any
structures outside of the molecular dynamics modeling space defined in Figure 1A, leaving only
the viral RBD and ACE2 receptor domain. These hybrid models of ACE2 interaction included
viral receptor binding domains from MERS-CoV (PDB:5x5c and 4kr0) (Yuan et al. 2017), HCoVOC43 (PDB: 6ohw) (Tortorici et al. 2019), and HCoV-HKU1 (PBD: 5gnb) (Ou et al. 2017) bound to
the ACE2 protein from the SARS-CoV-1 model. Unbound forms of the ACE2 structure were
obtained by deleting the viral structure in PDB: 6m17 and performing energy minimization for
2000 steps and 10ns of equilibration of molecular dynamics simulation in Amber18 (Case et al.
2005; Götz et al. 2012; Pierce et al. 2012; Salomon-Ferrer et al. 2013) prior to setting up
production runs for the sampling regime (described below). Loop modeling and refinement
were conducted where needed using Modeller in UCSF Chimera (Sali and Blundell 1993; Fiser et
al. 2000). A hybrid model of the bat HKU4 beta coronavirus interaction with ACE2 was similarly
constructed using PDB: 4qzv (Wang et al. 2014), batCoV-HKU4 bound to the MERS target
human CD26, as a reference for structural alignment to PDB: 6m17. Our hybrid models of the
viral RBD consisted of the largely un-glycosylated region (represented in PDB: 6m17 from site
335-518). Only one glycan was removed using swapaa in UCSF Chimera at ASN 343 on the viral
RBD located on the opposite side of the RBD-ACE2 interface (PDB: 6m17). Five glycans on the
ACE2 receptor domain were also removed, none occurring near the binding interface (ASN 53,
ASN 90, ASN 103, ASN 322, ASN 546). Single mutation models were also similarly constructed
to examine the effects of single mutations of potentially large effect. These models are
summarized in Table 1 and are available in a separate supplemental download file titled
PDBmodels.zip.
Mutant model construction and rationale
To generate in silico site-directed mutagenesis computations, we created mutant models using
the swapaa function in UCSF Chimera 1.13 by first swapping amino acids using optimal
configurations in the Dunbrack rotamer library, then using 2000 steepest gradient descent
steps of energy minimization to relax the regions around the amino acid replacement. Mutant

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

15

models were chosen to test the predicted sites functional role mitigating local binding between
the viral RBD and ACE2 by comparing amino acid replacements with either very similar or very
different sidechain properties. This is summarized in Table 2. The SARS-CoV-2 N501Y mutant
model was constructed using PDB:6m17. This model of the viral RBD only extended from site
335-518 and therefore only included this single mutation (N501Y) from among the seven other
amino acid replacements and two deletions found to occur on the B.1.1.7 lineage (The total set
of mutations defining this variant are del 69-70, del 144, N501Y, A570D, D614G, P681H, T716I
and S982A). Because of its proximity to the binding interface, the N501Y mutation is believed
to be one of the most functional.
Molecular dynamics simulation protocols
To facilitate the proper statistical confidence of the differences in rapid vibrational
states in our model comparisons, many individual graphic processing unit (GPU) accelerated
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were produced in order to build large statistical replicate
sets of MD trajectories. All accelerated MD simulations were prepared with explicit solvation
and conducted using the particle mesh Ewald method employed by pmemd.cuda in Amber18
(Ewald 1921; Darden et al. 1993; Case et al. 2005; Pierce et al. 2012; Salomon-Ferrer et al.
2013) via the DROIDS v3.0 interface (Detecting Relative Outlier Impacts in Dynamic Simulation)
(Babbitt et al. 2018; Babbitt et al. 2020). Simulations were run on a Linux Mint 19 operating
system mounting two Nvidia Titan Xp graphics processors. Explicitly solvated protein systems
were prepared using tLeap (Ambertools18) using the ff14SB protein force field (Maier et al.
2015) and protonated at all available sites using pdb4amber in Ambertools18. Solvation was
generated using the Tip3P water model (Mao and Zhang 2012) in a 12nm octahedral water box
and subsequent charge neutralization with Na+ and Cl- ions. All comparative molecular
dynamics binding analyses utilized the following protocol. After energy minimization, heating to
300K, and 10ns equilibration, an ensemble of 200 MD production runs each lasting 0.2
nanoseconds was created for both viral bound and unbound ACE2 receptor (Figure 1B). Two
examples of the 10ns RMSF equilibration are also shown in Figure 1C. Each MD production run
was preceded by a single random length short spacing run selected from a range of 0 to 0.1ns
to mitigate the effect of chaos (i.e. sensitivity to initial conditions) in the driving ensemble
differences in the MD production runs. All MD was conducted using an Andersen thermostat
under a constant pressure of 1 atmosphere (Andersen 1980). Root mean square atom
fluctuations (rmsf) were calculated using the atomicfluct function in CPPTRAJ (Roe and
Cheatham 2013). To assess the adequacy of the 10ns equilibration step prior to sampling in our
many comparisons of strains, a longer range equilibration and production sampling was
conducted upon only the SARS-Cov-2 model (PDB: 6m17). This simulation involved 100ns of
equilibration followed by a 100 x 0.5ns sampling regime on the viral bound and unbound ACE2.
This result is presented in Figure 2.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

16

Comparative dynamics of bound/unbound and mutant/wild type functional states
Computational modeling of bound and unbound protein structure dynamics can identify
both proximal and distal differences in molecular motion as a result of the binding interaction.
In the interest of studying functional dynamics, we focus on regions with highly dampened
molecular motion at the interface between the viral RBDs and ACE2. Given the chaotic nature
of individual molecular dynamics simulations, ensembles on the order of hundreds of samples
are required for comparing functional states and deriving statistically significant differences
between them. Furthermore, binding interactions can potentially be disrupted or prevented
entirely by dynamic thermal noise that exists inherently in the system. In our study, the
dampened atom fluctuations of receptors ACE2, CD26, and ACE1 upon binding are indicative of
molecular recognition, in the sense that weak bonding interactions overcome baseline thermal
motion and lead to a persistent functional state.
The molecular dynamics of the viral bound and unbound models of CD26/ACE2 and
lisinopril bound and unbound models of viral bound ACE1/ACE2 were generated and
statistically compared using the DROIDS v3.0 comparative protein dynamics software interface
for Amber18 (Babbitt et al. 2018; Babbitt et al. 2020). The symmetric Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence or relative entropy between the distributions of atom fluctuation (i.e. root mean
square fluctuation or rmsf taken from 0.01 ns time slices of total MD simulation time) on viral
bound and unbound ACE2 were computed using DROIDS and color mapped to the protein
backbone with individual amino acid resolution to the bound structures using a temperature
scale (i.e. where red is hot or amplified fluctuation and blue is cold or dampened fluctuation).
The rmsf value is thus
1
𝑟𝑚𝑠𝑓 =
4

4

𝑛

∑
𝑖=𝑁,𝐶,𝐶𝛼 ,𝑂

1
2
2
2
√ ∗ ∑(𝑣𝑗𝑥 − 𝑤𝑥 ) + (𝑣𝑗𝑦 − 𝑤𝑦 ) (𝑣𝑗𝑧 − 𝑤𝑧 )
𝑛

(1)

𝑗=1

where v represents the set of XYZ atom coordinates for i backbone atoms (C, N, O, or Cα) for a
given amino acid residue over j time points and w represents the average coordinate structure
for each MD production run in a given ensemble. The Kullback Leibler divergence (i.e. relative
entropy) or similarity between the root mean square fluctuation (rmsf) of two homologous
atoms moving in two molecular dynamics simulations representing a functional binding
interaction (i.e. where 0 = unbound state and 1 = viral bound state) can be described by
𝑇

𝐾𝐿𝑑𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 = ∑ [(𝑟𝑚𝑠𝑓0 ∗ log
𝑡=50𝑝𝑠

𝑟𝑚𝑠𝑓0
𝑟𝑚𝑠𝑓1
) + (𝑟𝑚𝑠𝑓1 ∗ log
)]⁄𝑇
𝑟𝑚𝑠𝑓1
𝑟𝑚𝑠𝑓0

(2)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

17

where rmsf represents the average root mean square deviation of a given atom over time.
More specifically, the rmsf is a directionless root mean square fluctuation sampled over an
ensemble of MD runs with similar time slice intervals. Because mutational events at the protein
level are typically amino acid replacements, this calculation is more useful if applied to
resolution of single amino acids rather than single atoms. Because only the 4 protein backbone
atoms (N, Cα, C and O) are homologous between residues, the R groups or side chains are
ignored in the calculation and equation 3 can be applied. Since the sidechain atoms always
attach to this backbone, rmsf still indirectly samples the dynamic effect of amino acid sidechain
replacement as they are still present in the simulation. The reference state of the protein is
unbound while the query state is viral bound. Therefore, this pairwise comparison represents
the functional impact of viral binding on the ACE2 protein’s normal unbound motion, where it is
expected that viral contact would typically dampen the fluctuation of atoms at the sites of
binding to some degree. This calculation in equation 2 is used to derive all the color maps and
KL divergence (i.e. dFLUX) values presented in the Figures. Multiple test-corrected two sample
Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests are used to determine the statistical significance of local site-wise
differences in the rmsf distributions in viral bound and unbound ACE2 models. The test was
applied independently to each amino acid site. The Benjamini-Hochberg method was used to all
the adjust p-values for the false discovery rate generated from the multiple sites of a given
protein structure.
Structural models, images, movies and data sets for the post-processed molecular dynamics
presented in this work are deposited at Zenodo CERN under the DOI 10.5281/zenodo.4421581
A movie file comparing SARS-CoV-2 RBD interaction with ACE2, in both wildtype and N501Y
mutant strains is also available at https://youtu.be/ptn1_BBJi70
SUPPORTING MATERIAL
The main repository for DROIDS 3.0 and maxDemon 1.0 can be found at the GitHub repository
link below. Please follow the link to “Releases” and download the latest release as .tar.gz or .zip
https://github.com/gbabbitt/DROIDS-3.0-comparative-protein-dynamics
A website for DROIDS is also available here.
https://people.rit.edu/gabsbi/
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
PR, FC and GAB designed and executed the biological study. GAB designed the statistical
methods and wrote computer code to implement the methods. PR, GAB, FC, AOH, and MLL
interpreted the results and wrote the manuscript.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

18

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We acknowledge funding support from the National Science Foundation (NSF Award Number
2029885) and the National Institutes of Health (NIH grant GM116102). We also acknowledge
the Nvidia Corporation for a hardware support grant.
FIGURE LEGENDS
Figure 1. (A) An overview of the open conformation SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein (PDB:
6vyb) interaction with its human target cell receptor, angiotensin 1 converting enzyme 2
(ACE2 PDB: 6m17). The green box in the center shows our modeling region that bounds the
subsequent molecular dynamics simulations in the study. (B) The modeling region of the viral
receptor binding domain (RBD) in red and ACE2 target protein in blue is shown along with the
most relevant features of the binding interface; the N-terminal helices of ACE2 shown in green
and the three main sites of the RBD N501 site interactions shown in magenta. (C) An overview
of the DROIDS comparative molecular dynamic pipeline for binding signature analysis used
throughout this study. The signed/symmetric KL divergence (or relative entropy) in the
distribution of viral bound vs. unbound ACE2 atom fluctuations was collected over 200
production runs and is used to measure the difference in motion for each single amino acid’s
backbone (i.e. N, C, Cα, and O) upon binding by the virus.
Figure 2. DROIDS binding signature of dampened atom fluctuations in human ACE2 receptor
protein upon interaction with both SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein (modeled from PDB:
6m17) and the highly transmissible N501Y variant responsible for recent lockdowns in
southeast England. Shift in atom fluctuations were calculated as the signed symmetric
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence (i.e. relative entropy or dFLUX) of distributions of the root
mean square time deviations (rmsf) for residue averaged protein backbone atoms (i.e. N, Cα, C
and O) for ACE2 in its spike bound (PDB: 6m17) versus unbound dynamic state (PDB: 6m17
without the viral receptor binding domain or RBD). Here we show color mapping (A, B, D) and
sequence positional plotting (C, E) of dampening of atom motion on viral RBD-protein target
interface in blue for (A-C) the original strain of SARS-CoV-2 and (D-E) its recent N501Y variant.
The sequence profile of the KL divergence between viral bound and unbound ACE2 produces
negative peaks indicating key residue binding interactions with the N-terminal helices (white)
and the N501 interactions at Q325, K353 and the AAQPLL 386-392 motif (yellow). The N501Y
mutation is marked by the green star (2D).
Figure 3. DROIDS binding signature of dampened atom fluctuations in human CD26 and ACE2
receptor proteins upon interaction with the bat progenitor strain batCoV-HKU4 glycoprotein
(modeled from PDB: 4qzv and 6m17). Here we show color mapping (A, B, D) and sequence

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

19

positional plotting (C, E) of dampening of atom motion on the viral RBD-protein target interface
in blue for (A-C) its known targeting of CD26 and (A,D-E) its hypothetical targeting of ACE2. The
sequence profile of the KL divergence between viral bound and unbound target proteins
produces two strong negative peaks indicating key residue binding interactions with the (C) the
SAMLI and double serine motifs (shown in yellow) on CD26 and (E) the N-terminal helices on
ACE2.
Figure 4. DROIDS binding signature of dampened atom fluctuations in human ACE2 receptor
proteins upon interaction with two human commensal strains hCoV-OC43 and hCoV-HKU1
glycoprotein (modeled from PDB: 6ohw, 5gnb and 6m17). Here we show color mapping (A, B,
D) and sequence positional plotting (C, E) of dampening of atom motion on the viral RBDprotein target interface in blue for (A-C) the targeting of ACE2 by the most benign strain hCoVOC43 and (D-E) its less benign counterpart hCoV-HKU1. The sequence profile of the KL
divergence between viral bound and unbound target proteins produces strong negative peak
indicating key residue binding interactions (C, E) with the N-terminal helices on ACE2 and (E)
moderate interactions with K353 and Q325 observed only in hCoV-HKU1.
Figure 5. DROIDS binding signature of dampened atom fluctuations in human ACE2 receptor
proteins upon interaction with the past human outbreak strain MERS-CoV spike glycoprotein
(modeled from PDB: 4kr0, 5x5c, and 6m17). Here we show color mapping (A, B, D) and
sequence positional plotting (C, E) of dampening of atom motion on the viral RBD-protein
target interface in blue for (A-C) the targeting of CD26 by the MERS-CoV and (D-E) the
hypothetical targeting of ACE2 by MERS-CoV. The sequence profile of the KL divergence
between viral bound and unbound target proteins produces strong negative peaks indicating
key residue binding interactions with (C) the SAMLI 291-5 and SS333-4 motifs on CD26 and €
with the N-terminal helices on ACE2. This is only a very weak interaction with K353 (yellow) on
the ACE2.
Figure 6. DROIDS binding signature of dampened atom fluctuations in human ACE2 receptor
proteins upon interaction with the past human outbreak strain SARS-CoV-1 spike
glycoprotein (modeled from PDB: 6acg). Here we show color mapping (A, B) and sequence
positional plotting (C) of dampening of atom motion on the viral RBD-protein target interface in
blue for (A-B) the targeting of ACE2 by the SARS-CoV-1. The sequence profile of the KL
divergence between viral bound and unbound target proteins produces strong negative peaks
indicating key residue binding interactions (C) with the N-terminal helices on ACE2 and also
moderate interactions with K353, Q325, and AAQPFLL motif (yellow).
Figure 7. A functional evolutionary model of SARS-type viral protein binding interactions
during zoonotic spillover. (A) The two touch model consists of a unique combination of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

20

universally evolutionary conserved ACE2 interaction at the N-terminal helices likely preadapted
from its interaction with the SAMLI motif on CD26 (shown with black arrow) and a much more
promiscuous, dynamically complex , and evolvable interaction with K353 and surrounding sites
(shown with red arrow) . (B) Given the conserved nature of binding of CD26 at SAMLI and ACE2
at the N-terminal helices of ACE2 by the same region of the viral receptor binding domain (RBD)
across the large diversity of strains we surveyed, we hypothesize this region of the virus is likely
responsible for instances of zoonotic spillover to humans. The more pathogenic SARS-like
outbreaks associated with ACE2 seem to develop transient dynamics of N501 that involve
promiscuous interactions at three closely located sites (K353 and the two flanking sites Q325
and AAQPFLL 386-92). This creates a ‘slippery two touch interaction with the ACE2 target. In the
much more transmissible new strain, N501Y (lineage B.1.1.7), the promiscuous interactions are
mostly lost, favoring a much more stable binding interaction with K353 alone.
Table 1. Hybrid models comparatively analyzed in the course of this study
Effect of…on
MD

bound structure

unbound
structure

PDB ID’s utilized
to create model

Figure panel(s)

viral binding

SARS-CoV-2 RBD
(wildtype and
N501Y) and
ACE2
SARS-CoV-1 RBD
and ACE2
hCoV-HKU1 RBD
and ACE2
hCoV-OC43 RBD
and ACE2
bat CoV-HKU4
and CD26
bat CoV-HKU4
and ACE2
MERS and CD26

ACE2

6m17

Figure 2 A-E

ACE2

6acg

Figure 5 A-C

ACE2

5gnb and 6m17

Figure 4D-E

ACE2

6ohw and 6m17

Figure 4 A-C

CD26

4qzv

Figure 3 A-C

ACE2

4qzv and 6m17

Figure 3 D-E

CD26

5x5c and 4qzv

5D and S3C

viral binding
viral binding
viral binding
viral binding
viral binding
viral binding

Table 2. In silico targeted mutagenesis studies of the SARS-CoV-2 receptor-spike interaction
with various amino acid mutations. Mutations were conducted with the swapaa command in
UCSF Chimera, and bound structures were minimized with 2000 steps of steepest descent. D

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

21

(blue) signifies dampened molecular motion, NC (yellow) indicates no significant change in
molecular motion as a result of binding, and A (orange) indicates an amplification in molecular
motion after RBD binding. Significance criteria was determined as having <= -1 KL divergence or
less (dampened motion during binding), or >=1 KL divergence or more (amplified motion during
binding). N-terminal helix and AAQPFLL motif categorization was determined as dampened or
amplified when most of their constituent amino acids had a KL divergence of <= -1 or >= 1,
respectively.

Protein

In silico
Mutation

N-terminal
Helix

Q325

K353

386-AAQPFLL-392

Wild Type

D

NC

D

D

ACE2

K353A

NC

NC

D

D

ACE2

386-AA/EE-387

D

D

D

D

ACE2

390-FLL/EEE-392

D

NC

D

D

ACE2

V739E

NC

NC

D

NC

ACE2

V739L

D

D

D

NC

ACE2

K408A

D

NC

D

D

RBD

V185E

NC

NC

D

NC

RBD

V185L

D

D

D

NC

REFERENCES
Ahamad S, Kanipakam H, Gupta D. 2020. Insights into the structural and dynamical
changes of spike glycoprotein mutations associated with SARS-CoV-2 host
receptor binding. J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn. 0:1–13.
Al-Khafaji K, AL-Duhaidahawi D, Tok TT. 2020. Using integrated computational
approaches to identify safe and rapid treatment for SARS-CoV-2. J. Biomol.
Struct. Dyn. 0:1–9.
Andersen HC. 1980. Molecular dynamics simulations at constant pressure and/or
temperature. J. Chem. Phys. 72:2384–2393.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

22

Babbitt GA, Fokoue EP, Evans JR, Diller KI, Adams LE. 2020. DROIDS 3.0-Detecting
Genetic and Drug Class Variant Impact on Conserved Protein Binding Dynamics.
Biophys. J. 118:541–551.
Babbitt GA, Mortensen JS, Coppola EE, Adams LE, Liao JK. 2018. DROIDS 1.20: A
GUI-Based Pipeline for GPU-Accelerated Comparative Protein Dynamics.
Biophys. J. 114:1009–1017.
Bagdonaite I, Wandall HH. 2018. Global aspects of viral glycosylation. Glycobiology
28:443–467.
Cantuti-Castelvetri L, Ojha R, Pedro LD, Djannatian M, Franz J, Kuivanen S, Meer F
van der, Kallio K, Kaya T, Anastasina M, et al. 2020. Neuropilin-1 facilitates
SARS-CoV-2 cell entry and infectivity. Science [Internet]. Available from:
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/early/2020/10/19/science.abd2985
Casalino L, Gaieb Z, Goldsmith JA, Hjorth CK, Dommer AC, Harbison AM, Fogarty CA,
Barros EP, Taylor BC, McLellan JS, et al. 2020. Beyond Shielding: The Roles of
Glycans in the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein. ACS Cent. Sci. 6:1722–1734.
Case DA, Cheatham TE, Darden T, Gohlke H, Luo R, Merz KM, Onufriev A, Simmerling
C, Wang B, Woods RJ. 2005. The Amber biomolecular simulation programs. J.
Comput. Chem. 26:1668–1688.
Daly JL, Simonetti B, Klein K, Chen K-E, Williamson MK, Antón-Plágaro C, Shoemark
DK, Simón-Gracia L, Bauer M, Hollandi R, et al. 2020. Neuropilin-1 is a host
factor for SARS-CoV-2 infection. Science [Internet]. Available from:
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/early/2020/10/19/science.abd3072
Darden T, York D, Pedersen L. 1993. Particle mesh Ewald: An N⋅log(N) method for
Ewald sums in large systems. J. Chem. Phys. 98:10089–10092.
Ewald PP. 1921. Die Berechnung optischer und elektrostatischer Gitterpotentiale. Ann.
Phys. 369:253–287.
Fiser A, Do RK, Sali A. 2000. Modeling of loops in protein structures. Protein Sci. Publ.
Protein Soc. 9:1753–1773.
Follis KE, York J, Nunberg JH. 2006. Furin cleavage of the SARS coronavirus spike
glycoprotein enhances cell-cell fusion but does not affect virion entry. Virology
350:358–369.
Fung TS, Liu DX. 2019. Human Coronavirus: Host-Pathogen Interaction. Annu. Rev.
Microbiol. 73:529–557.
Götz AW, Williamson MJ, Xu D, Poole D, Le Grand S, Walker RC. 2012. Routine
Microsecond Molecular Dynamics Simulations with AMBER on GPUs. 1.
Generalized Born. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 8:1542–1555.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

23

Haan CAM de, Vennema H, Rottier PJM. 2000. Assembly of the Coronavirus Envelope:
Homotypic Interactions between the M Proteins. J. Virol. 74:4967–4978.
Hoffmann M, Hofmann-Winkler H, Pöhlmann S. 2018. Priming Time: How Cellular
Proteases Arm Coronavirus Spike Proteins. Act. Viruses Host Proteases:71–98.
Hoffmann M, Kleine-Weber H, Pöhlmann S. 2020. A Multibasic Cleavage Site in the
Spike Protein of SARS-CoV-2 Is Essential for Infection of Human Lung Cells.
Mol. Cell 78:779-784.e5.
Hofmann H, Pyrc K, van der Hoek L, Geier M, Berkhout B, Pöhlmann S. 2005. Human
coronavirus NL63 employs the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
receptor for cellular entry. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102:7988–7993.
Ke Z, Oton J, Qu K, Cortese M, Zila V, McKeane L, Nakane T, Zivanov J, Neufeldt CJ,
Cerikan B, et al. 2020. Structures and distributions of SARS-CoV-2 spike
proteins on intact virions. Nature:1–5.
Kuba K, Imai Y, Rao S, Gao H, Guo F, Guan B, Huan Y, Yang P, Zhang Y, Deng W, et
al. 2005. A crucial role of angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) in SARS
coronavirus–induced lung injury. Nat. Med. 11:875–879.
Li W, Zhang C, Sui J, Kuhn JH, Moore MJ, Luo S, Wong S, Huang I, Xu K, Vasilieva N,
et al. 2005. Receptor and viral determinants of SARS‐coronavirus adaptation to
human ACE2. EMBO J. 24:1634–1643.
Maier JA, Martinez C, Kasavajhala K, Wickstrom L, Hauser KE, Simmerling C. 2015.
ff14SB: Improving the Accuracy of Protein Side Chain and Backbone Parameters
from ff99SB. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 11:3696–3713.
Mao Y, Zhang Y. 2012. Thermal conductivity, shear viscosity and specific heat of rigid
water models. Chem. Phys. Lett. 542:37–41.
Mittal A, Manjunath K, Ranjan RK, Kaushik S, Kumar S, Verma V. 2020. COVID-19
pandemic: Insights into structure, function, and hACE2 receptor recognition by
SARS-CoV-2. PLoS Pathog. [Internet] 16. Available from:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7444525/
Muralidharan N, Sakthivel R, Velmurugan D, Gromiha MM. 2020. Computational studies
of drug repurposing and synergism of lopinavir, oseltamivir and ritonavir binding
with SARS-CoV-2 protease against COVID-19. J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn. 0:1–6.
Ou X, Guan H, Qin B, Mu Z, Wojdyla JA, Wang M, Dominguez SR, Qian Z, Cui S. 2017.
Crystal structure of the receptor binding domain of the spike glycoprotein of
human betacoronavirus HKU1. Nat. Commun. 8:15216.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

24

Ou X, Liu Y, Lei X, Li P, Mi D, Ren L, Guo L, Guo R, Chen T, Hu J, et al. 2020.
Characterization of spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2 on virus entry and its
immune cross-reactivity with SARS-CoV. Nat. Commun. 11:1620.
Oudit GY, Crackower MA, Backx PH, Penninger JM. 2003. The role of ACE2 in
cardiovascular physiology. Trends Cardiovasc. Med. 13:93–101.
Pettersen EF, Goddard TD, Huang CC, Couch GS, Greenblatt DM, Meng EC, Ferrin
TE. 2004. UCSF Chimera--a visualization system for exploratory research and
analysis. J. Comput. Chem. 25:1605–1612.
Pierce LCT, Salomon-Ferrer R, Augusto F. de Oliveira C, McCammon JA, Walker RC.
2012. Routine Access to Millisecond Time Scale Events with Accelerated
Molecular Dynamics. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 8:2997–3002.
Pierri CL. 2020. SARS-CoV-2 spike protein: flexibility as a new target for fighting
infection. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 5:1–3.
Roe DR, Cheatham TE. 2013. PTRAJ and CPPTRAJ: Software for Processing and
Analysis of Molecular Dynamics Trajectory Data. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
9:3084–3095.
Sali A, Blundell TL. 1993. Comparative protein modelling by satisfaction of spatial
restraints. J. Mol. Biol. 234:779–815.
Salomon-Ferrer R, Götz AW, Poole D, Le Grand S, Walker RC. 2013. Routine
Microsecond Molecular Dynamics Simulations with AMBER on GPUs. 2. Explicit
Solvent Particle Mesh Ewald. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 9:3878–3888.
Shang J, Wan Y, Luo C, Ye G, Geng Q, Auerbach A, Li F. 2020. Cell entry mechanisms
of SARS-CoV-2. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 117:11727–11734.
Song W, Gui M, Wang X, Xiang Y. 2018. Cryo-EM structure of the SARS coronavirus
spike glycoprotein in complex with its host cell receptor ACE2. PLoS Pathog.
14:e1007236.
Tortorici MA, Walls AC, Lang Y, Wang C, Li Z, Koerhuis D, Boons G-J, Bosch B-J, Rey
FA, de Groot RJ, et al. 2019. Structural basis for human coronavirus attachment
to sialic acid receptors. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 26:481–489.
Turoňová B, Sikora M, Schürmann C, Hagen WJH, Welsch S, Blanc FEC, Bülow S von,
Gecht M, Bagola K, Hörner C, et al. 2020. In situ structural analysis of SARSCoV-2 spike reveals flexibility mediated by three hinges. Science 370:203–208.
Wang Q, Qi J, Yuan Y, Xuan Y, Han P, Wan Y, Ji W, Li Y, Wu Y, Wang J, et al. 2014.
Bat origins of MERS-CoV supported by bat coronavirus HKU4 usage of human
receptor CD26. Cell Host Microbe 16:328–337.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.293258; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

25

Wang Y, Liu M, Gao J. 2020. Enhanced receptor binding of SARS-CoV-2 through
networks of hydrogen-bonding and hydrophobic interactions. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. 117:13967–13974.
Watanabe Y, Allen JD, Wrapp D, McLellan JS, Crispin M. 2020. Site-specific glycan
analysis of the SARS-CoV-2 spike. Science 369:330–333.
Watanabe Y, Berndsen ZT, Raghwani J, Seabright GE, Allen JD, Pybus OG, McLellan
JS, Wilson IA, Bowden TA, Ward AB, et al. 2020. Vulnerabilities in coronavirus
glycan shields despite extensive glycosylation. Nat. Commun. 11:2688.
Yan R, Zhang Y, Li Y, Xia L, Guo Y, Zhou Q. 2020. Structural basis for the recognition
of SARS-CoV-2 by full-length human ACE2. Science 367:1444–1448.
Yao H, Song Y, Chen Y, Wu N, Xu J, Sun C, Zhang J, Weng T, Zhang Z, Wu Z, et al.
2020. Molecular Architecture of the SARS-CoV-2 Virus. Cell 183:730-738.e13.
Yu J, Qiao S, Guo R, Wang X. 2020. Cryo-EM structures of HKU2 and SADS-CoV
spike glycoproteins provide insights into coronavirus evolution. Nat. Commun.
11:3070.
Yuan Y, Cao D, Zhang Y, Ma J, Qi J, Wang Q, Lu G, Wu Y, Yan J, Shi Y, et al. 2017.
Cryo-EM structures of MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV spike glycoproteins reveal the
dynamic receptor binding domains. Nat. Commun. 8:15092.

A

B

ACE2

viral RBD
N terminal helices 3 sites interacting with N501 RBD

N

C

C

A

B
human ACE2 target protein

N-terminal helices
amplified
motion

D

dFLUX (signed KL divergence))

amplified
motion
4.3

3.3

SARS-CoV-2 viral
spike protein
receptor binding
domain (RBD)

N-terminal helices

SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-2
AAQPFLL

AAQPFLL
-4.3

-3.3

dampened
motion

C

K353

Q325

K353

N501Y
dampened
motion

Q325

hACE2

hACE2

E
N-terminal
helices

Q325
K353

AAQPFLL
386-392

Q325
N-terminal
helices

AAQPFLL
386-392

K353

B
dFLUX (signed KL divergence))

A

human CD26 target protein

bat CoV-HKU4 viral
spike glycoprotein
receptor binding
domain (RBD)

human ACE2 target protein

D

amplified
motion

amplified
motion

5.5

2.0

SAMLI 291-5
-5.5

SS 333-4

bat CoV-HKU4
dampened
motion

hCD26

E
C

SS 333-4

SAMLI 291-5

N-terminal helices

N-terminal
helices

-2.0

dampened
motion

bat CoV-HKU4

hACE2

B

A

hCoV-OC43 viral
spike glycoprotein
receptor binding
domain (RBD)

C

N-terminal helices

D

amplified
motion

amplified
motion

dFLUX (signed KL divergence))

human ACE2
target protein

enhanced
RBD loop
region

N-terminal helices

4.0

3.5

hCoV-HKU1
hCoV-OC43

K353

-3.5

-4.0

dampened
motion

hACE2

Q325

dampened
motion

hACE2

E
N-terminal
helices

N-terminal
helices

Q325

K353

human CD26 target protein

A

3.0

MERS-CoV viral
spike glycoprotein
receptor binding
domain (RBD)

D

B

amplified
motion

amplified
motion

3.0

MERS CoV

MERS CoV

-3.0

human ACE2 target protein

-3.0

dampened
motion

hCD26

dampened
motion

hACE2

E

C
SAMLI 291-5

SS 333-4

N-terminal
helices

K353

A

B
human ACE2 target protein

amplified
motion

N-terminal helices

dFLUX (signed KL divergence))

2.75

SARS-CoV-1 viral
spike glycoprotein
receptor binding
domain (RBD)

AAQPFLL

SARS-CoV-1
-2.75

dampened
motion

C
N-terminal
helices

Q325

K353

AAQPFLL
386-392

K353
Q325

hACE2

A

B

