bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

ACE2 interaction networks in COVID-19:
a physiological framework for prediction of outcome
in patients with cardiovascular risk factors
Zofia Wicik 1,2, Ceren Eyileten 2, Daniel Jakubik 2,Sérgio N Simões 3, David C Martins Jr 1,
Rodrigo Pavão 1, Jolanta M. Siller-Matula 2,4,*, Marek Postula 2
Centro de Matemática, Computação e Cognição, Universidade Federal do ABC, São Paulo, Brazil
Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Warsaw, Center for
Preclinical Research and Technology CEPT, Warsaw, Poland
3 Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of Espírito Santo, Serra, ES, Brazil
4 Department of Internal Medicine II, Division of Cardiology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
* Correspondence: Professor Jolanta M. Siller-Matula, MD Ph.D.; jolanta.siller-matula@meduniwien.ac.at
1
2

Abstract: (1) Background: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
infection (coronavirus disease 2019; COVID-19) is associated with adverse outcomes in patients
with cardiovascular disease (CVD). The aim of the study was to characterize the interaction
between SARS-CoV-2 and Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2) functional networks with a
focus on CVD.; (2) Methods: Using the network medicine approach and publicly available datasets,
we investigated ACE2 tissue expression and described ACE2 interaction networks which could be
affected by SARS-CoV-2 infection in the heart, lungs and nervous system. We compared them with
changes in ACE-2 networks following SARS-CoV-2 infection by analyzing public data of stem
cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs). This analysis was performed using the NERI algorithm,
which integrates protein-protein interaction with co-expression networks. We also performed
miRNA-target predictions to identify which ones regulate ACE2-related networks and could play a
role in the COVID19 outcome. Finally, we performed enrichment analysis for identifying the main
COVID-19 risk groups. (3) Results: We found similar ACE2 expression confidence levels in
respiratory and cardiovascular systems, supporting that heart tissue is a potential target of
SARS-CoV-2. Analysis of ACE2 interaction networks in infected hiPSC-CMs identified multiple
hub genes with corrupted signalling which can be responsible for cardiovascular symptoms. The
most affected genes were EGFR, FN1, TP53, HSP90AA1, and APP, while the most affected
interactions were associated with MAST2 and CALM1. Enrichment analysis revealed multiple
diseases associated with the interaction networks of ACE2, especially cancerous diseases, obesity,
hypertensive disease, Alzheimer's disease, non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and
congestive heart failure. Among affected ACE2-network components connected with SARS-Cov-2
interactome, we identified AGT, CAT, DPP4, CCL2, TFRC and CAV1, associated with
cardiovascular risk factors. We described for the first time miRNAs which were common regulators
of ACE2 networks and virus-related proteins in all analyzed datasets. The top miRNAs were
miR-27a-3p, miR-26b-5p, miR-10b-5p, miR-302c-5p, hsa-miR-587, hsa-miR-1305, hsa-miR-200b-3p,
hsa-miR-124-3p, and hsa-miR-16-5p.; (4) Conclusion: Our study provides a complete mechanistic
framework for investigating the ACE2 network which was validated by expression data. This
framework predicted risk groups, including the established ones, thus providing reliable novel
information regarding the complexity of signalling pathways affected by SARS-CoV-2. It also
identified miR which could be used in personalized diagnosis in COVID-19.
Keywords: ACE2; COVID-19; SARS-CoV-2; cardiovascular; gene expression; miRNA;, therapeutic
target; microRNA; miR

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Abbreviations
ACE2: Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2
ACE: Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 1
ARDS: Acute respiratory distress syndrome
COVID-19: Coronavirus disease 2019
CVD: Cardiovascular disease
DEG: Differentially expressed genes
DM: Diabetes mellitus
eNOS: Endothelial nitric oxide synthase
GO: Gene Ontology
HF: Heart failure
HK: High molecular weight kininogen
INS: Insulin
KKS: Kallikrein-Kinin system
KNG1: Kininogen 1
MERS: Middle-East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
MI: Myocardial infarction
miRNAs, miR: MicroRNAs
NT-proBNP: N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide
PPI: Protein-protein interaction
RAS: Renin-angiotensin system
REN: Renin
ROS: Reactive oxygen species
SARS-CoV-2: Severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2
TMPRSS2: Transmembrane protease serine 2
Gene/protein
ACE2: Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2
ADAM17: ADAM metallopeptidase domain 17
AGT: Angiotensinogen
AGTR1: Angiotensin II Receptor Type 1
ALB: Albumin
APP: Amyloid Beta Precursor Protein
ANPEP: Alanyl Aminopeptidase
APN/CD13: Aminopeptidase N/CD13
ATP6AP2: ATPase H+ Transporting Accessory Protein 2
CALM1: Calmodulin 1
CAT: Catalase
CAV1: Caveolin-1
CCL2: C-C Motif Chemokine Ligand 2
CCN2: Cellular Communication Network Factor 2
CDHR2: Cadherin Related Family Member 2
CDK4: Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 4
CLEC4M: C-Type Lectin Domain Family 4 Member M
CTSA: Cathepsin A

CTSG: Cathepsin G
DPP4: Dipeptidyl Peptidase 4
EGFR: Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
ENPEP: Glutamyl Aminopeptidase
EV71: Enterovirus 71
FABP2: Fatty acid-binding protein 2
FoxO2: Forkhead box O-2
INS: Insulin
KNG1: Kininogen 1
KPNA2: Karyopherin Subunit Alpha 2
LNPEP: Leucyl And Cystinyl Aminopeptidase
LTA4H: Leukotriene A4 hydrolase
MAPK: Mitogen-activated protein kinase
MCP-1: Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1
MEP1A: Meprin A subunit alpha
MME: Membrane metalloendopeptidase
MS4A10: Membrane Spanning 4-Domains A10
NFKB1: Nuclear Factor Kappa B Subunit 1
NF-κB: Nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of
activated B cells
NPC1: Niemann-Pick disease, type C1
PAI-1: Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1
PDGFR-b: Platelet-derived growth factor receptor-beta
PPARγ: Peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma
PRCP: Prolylcarboxypeptidase
TFRC: Transferrin Receptor
TGFB1: Transforming Growth Factor Beta 1
THOP1: Thimet Oligopeptidase 1
TMPRSS2: Transmembrane protease, serine 2
VEGFR2: Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2
Signalling pathways
AGE-RAGE: Advanced glycation endproducts Receptor for Advanced glycation end
products
ERK1/2/AP-1: Extracellular signal-regulated kinases
1/2/AP-1
PI3K/AKT/Nrf2: Phosphatidylinositol
3’-kinase/AKT/NF-E2-related factor 2
ERK1/2/AP-1: Extracellular signal-regulated kinases
1/2/AP-1
PI3K/AKT/Nrf2: Phosphatidylinositol
3’-kinase/AKT/NF-E2-related factor 2

1. Introduction
At the end of 2019 in Wuhan (China), a novel coronavirus named severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has been discovered [1]. The clinical manifestations of
SARS-CoV-2 infection, named coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), varies in severity from
asymptomatic infection to acute viral pneumonia with fatal outcome. Nearly half of patients who
were at risk of acute course of the disease suffered from comorbidities including hypertension,
diabetes mellitus (DM) and coronary heart disease [2,3]. Importantly, COVID-19 is associated with
increased risk for mortality and adverse cardiovascular events among patients with underlying
cardiovascular diseases (CVD) [4]. A similar association between the virus and CVD was observed
during previous coronavirus outbreaks caused as Middle-East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(MERS) or severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) [5,6]. Therefore, these data
suggest a common factor that is associated with the pathogenesis of COVID-19 and CVD. The

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

etiology of cardiac injury in COVID-19, however, still remains unclear. It is hypothesized that
cardiac injury may be ischemia mediated, and the profound inflammatory and hemodynamic
impacts are seen in COVID-19 can cause atherosclerotic plaque rupture or oxygen supply-demand
mismatch resulting in ischemia [7]. Most probably, the link between cardiovascular complications
and infection may be related to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), which was found to act as
a functional receptor for SARS-CoV-2 [8].
ACE2 is a multi-action cell membrane enzyme that is widely expressed in the lungs, heart
tissue, intestine, kidneys, central nervous system, testis, and liver [9]. During the 20 years from its
discovery, the investigations targeting the complex role of this enzyme established ACE2 as an
important regulator in hypertension, heart failure (HF), myocardial infarction (MI), DM, and lung
diseases [10,11]. The viral entry to cells is determined by the interaction between the SARS-CoV-2
spike (S) protein and N-terminal segment of ACE2 protein, with a subsequent decrease in ACE2
surface expression, which may be enhanced by cofactor transmembrane protease serine 2
(TMPRSS2) [12]. Publications of independent research groups showed that cardiomyocytes can be
infected by SARS-CoV-2. The virus can enter hiPSC-CMs via ACE2, and the viral replication and
cytopathic effects induce hiPSC-CM apoptosis and cessation of beating after 72 h of infection while
inhibiting metabolic pathways and suppressing ACE2 expression during this initial infection stage
[13]. Moreover, SARS-CoV-2 undergoes a full replication circle and induces a cytotoxic response in
cardiomyocytes, by inducing pathways related to viral response and interferon signalling, apoptosis
and reactive oxygen stress [14]. Consistently, mRNA and protein ACE2 are expressed in hiPS-CM,
whereas TMPRSS2 was detected only at very low levels by RNA sequencing [14]. Finally,
SARS-CoV-2 was invariably detected in cardiomyocytes of COVID-19 patients without clinical signs
of cardiac involvement, with degrees of injury ranging from the absence of cell death and subcellular
alterations hallmarks to intracellular oedema and sarcomere ruptures [15]. These findings support
that heart tissue can be infected with SARS-Cov-2.
As a consequence of SARS-CoV-2 infection, downregulated ACE2 pathways may lead to
myocardial injury, fibrosis, and inflammation which may be responsible for adverse cardiac
outcomes [16]. In line with these findings, several reports linked SARS-CoV-2 infection with
myocardial damage and HF, accompanied by acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), acute
kidney injury, arrhythmias, and coagulopathy. The incidence of myocardial injury ranged from 7 to
28% depending on the severity of COVID-19, accompanied by increased levels of cardiac troponins,
creatinine kinase–myocardial band, myohemoglobin, and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide
(NT-proBNP) [17–19].
In the current work, we characterized the ACE2 interaction network in the context of
myocardial injury. Our quantitative in silico analysis pointed out: (1) the potential tissues and organs
which can be infected by SARS-CoV-2; (2) the top ACE2 interactors associated with the virus-related
processes with altered co-expression networks in hiPSC-CMs after SARS-CoV-2 infection, which
likely play role in the development of CVD; (3) signalling pathways associated with alteration of
ACE2 networks; (4) prediction of risk groups in COVID-19; (5) connections between ACE2 and
SARS-Cov2 interactomes, as well as ACE2 co-expression networks in hiPSC-CMs; (6) the most
promising microRNAs (miRNAs, miR) regulating ACE2 networks for potential diagnostic and
prognostic applications.
Our comprehensive analysis investigating ACE2 receptor-related interaction networks, their
connection with SARS-CoV-2 interactome, enriched signalling pathways, miRNAs, associated
diseases, provide precise targets for developing predictive tools, with the potential for reducing
health, personal and economic consequences of the pandemic.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Data collection
ACE2-associated genes used for constructing interaction networks were extracted from KEGG
database (23 genes from renin-angiotensin system-RAS pathway) [20]; stringApp (top 40 ACE2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

interactors) [21], Archs4 database https://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/archs4 (top 20 genes with correlated
expression), Genecards database https://www.genecards.org (5 interactors and 4 sister terms),
literature search [22–24]. In total, we collected 69 genes, which were used further for miRNA
prediction analysis and constructing interaction networks. In all steps of data integration and
bioinformatic analyses, we used our R package wizbionet [25].Tissue Expression analysis
The tissue expression of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 was evaluated based on a dataset downloaded
from the Tissues 2.0 database and the GTEX database [26]. Tissues 2.0 database integrates:
transcriptomics datasets from multiple sources and proteomics datasets from humans and other
organisms, quantifying gene expression confidence scores across tissues. All tissues were sorted by
the decreasing expression confidence of ACE2 and TMPRSS2. Additionally, mean expression
confidence for the ACE2 network was calculated for each tissue from the database. Gene expression
confidence scores were also mapped on the visualization of the interaction networks.
2.2. Interaction network analysis
2.2.1. ACE2 interactome
To analyze connections between ACE2 and other genes, we constructed a PPI network in
Cytoscape 3.7.2, using human interactome data from StringApp 1.5.1 (Search Tool for the Retrieval
of Interacting Genes/Proteins) database, including known and predicted protein-protein interactions
[21,27]. Interaction networks were composed of a set of genes (nodes) connected by edges that
represent functional relationships among these genes. As suggested by the StringApp, we took into
account connections with edge interaction confidence cut-off >0.4 (medium confidence), with 1 being
the highest possible confidence and 0 lowest. We compared the complete tissue-specific ACE2
network, across the heart, lungs, and nervous system, as well as the virus-infection-related proteins
network. The criteria of selection tissue-specific networks were gene expression confidence score >2.
2.2.2. NERI Method
NERI (NEtwork by Relative Importance) [28] is a method that computes the relative importance
of genes related to the seeds. The method is based on the Network Medicine Hypotheses: Locality,
Disease Module, and Network Parsimony. It integrates PPI network with expression data (from the
two conditions, e.g. control and disease), and uses a previously chosen seed genes list. NERI
computes two relative importance scores for each gene, one score for each expression condition
(control and disease). This is done by selecting the best shortest paths (based on the Parsimony
Hypothesis) from seeds to their neighborhood (based on Locality and Disease Module Hypotheses)
and taking into account the expression condition. The adopted criterion to evaluate a path is the
modified Kendall's concordance (a way to measure a group correlation) of expression of genes in the
given path -- the more concordant a path is, the better. Then, the relative importance score of a given
gene is the sum of all concordances of the selected paths to which the gene belongs, weighted by the
proximity to the seeds. This procedure is executed for two conditions independently, generating two
networks (e.g. control and disease networks). In the end, the NERI method performs the differential
network analyses, which outputs two ranked lists of genes (X, Δ'): one based on the sum of the
relative importance scores, and another based on the normalized difference between the relative
importance. The first one (X) prioritizes genes with party hub features, possessing high topological
centrality and, at the same time, high co-expression relative to the seed genes. The second one (Δ')
prioritized the most altered genes between two conditions as described before [28].In the present
study, we used the NERI algorithm to analyze raw expression signals obtained from the GSE150392
dataset. Besides, we used the BIOGRID dataset to construct the PPI network and, as seeds genes, the
69 ACE2-related interactors collected as described in the method section. Differential expression
analysis for visualization was performed using the Mann Whitney test with p FDR corrected <0.05.
2.3. Extraction of disease-relevant ontological terms

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

To improve the interpretation of the gene functions, we mined Gene Ontology (GO) database
using the biomaRt R package for extracting GO terms and further genes associated with the
following processes: “inflammation” (22 GO terms; 648 genes), “coagulation” (18 GO terms; 223
genes) [29], “angiogenesis” (24 GO terms; 535 genes), “cardiac muscle functions” (176 GO terms; 524
genes), “muscle hypertrophy” (16 GO terms; 85 genes), and “fibrosis” (23 GO terms; 263). A similar
methodology was used to extract genes potentially related to “viral infection” (120 GO terms, 1047
genes). Disease relevant gene lists were extracted from the http://t2diacod.igib.res.in/ database [30].
From this database, we used atherosclerosis, nephropathy, CVD, and neuropathy datasets.
Diabetes-related genes were extracted from the StringApp disease database, for the term “diabetes
type-2”. GO term lists used for gene extraction are shown in Supplementary Table 1.
2.4. Enrichment analysis
Enrichment analysis is a computational method for increasing the likelihood to identify the
most significant biological processes related to the study [31]. Enrichment analysis of the diseases
and networks was done with the EnrichR database [32], using Fisher's exact with Benjamini and
Hochberg correction, while the reference was precomputed background for each term in each gene
set library. Signalling pathways were analyzed using BioPlanet2019 and Human KEGG 2019
datasets. Diseases were analyzed using DisGenet Dataset and are Diseases AutoRIF Gene Lists
datasets. In all statistical analyses, the significance cutoff was set to corrected p-value ≤0.05.
2.5 miRNA predictions
In order to identify miRNAs regulating ACE2 related genes, we used R and multimiR package
with default settings, similar to previous publications from our group [29,33–35]. Interaction
networks between ACE2-related genes and miRNAs were constructed in R and exported to
Cytoscape 3.7.2. Next, the interaction networks were merged with the predicted PPI network for
ACE2 constructed using StringApp. Both networks were merged using official gene symbols and
ENSG numbers.
3. Results
3.1. ACE2 tissue-specific expression
To evaluate the potential susceptibility of the heart for SARS-CoV-2 infection, we ranked all
6668 human tissues from the Tissue 2.0 database, based on provided by the database ACE2
expression confidence (scale 0-5). This analysis revealed that lungs and respiratory systems are in
the 14th and 15th place in terms of ACE2 expression confidence, after heart and cardiovascular
systems (12th and 13th place, respectively), and before the nervous system (16th place; Figure 1 A).
TMPRSS2 gene expression confidence was lower in the lungs and heart than in the nervous system.
The mean expression of 69 genes from the network was highest in the nervous system in comparison
to heart and respiratory system tissues. Exceptionally high scores for ACE2 expression were
assigned to urogenital and reproductive tissues. As an additional validation, we used the expression
dataset from the GTEX database, which confirmed our findings using the TISSUES2.0 database
(Figure 1 B). According to the GTEX database testis showed the highest expression of ACE2, while
the prostate showed high expression of TMPRSS2 Heart-related tissues located respectively in 5, 7,
and 15th place. In turn, the gastrointestinal tract in GTEX appears in 2ndplace while in the Tissues
2.0 database it was not present among top hits. In both datasets, female reproductive glands
(Tissues2.0) and mammary glands (GTEX) showed a high expression of the ACE2 receptor.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 1. Tissues sorted by the potential of being infected by SARS-CoV-2. These lists of tissues
were generated according to the concentration of membrane receptors ACE2 and TMPRSS2,
obtained from (A) TISSUES 2.0 database expression confidence values, and (B) GTEX database
Transcripts Per Million (TPM). The virus starts the cell infection by binding to ACE2, a major hub in
multiple physiological processes: this binding can block ACE2 network activity. However, the virus
will enter the host cell when TMPRSS2 cleavages ACE2. The first column depicts the average gene
and protein expression confidence for the ACE2 receptor; the second column depicts the average
expression confidence of TMPRSS2. The mean and standard deviation of expression confidence
across 69 genes/proteins of the ACE2 network are presented in third and fourth columns,
respectively. Notice that the lungs and respiratory system are ranked as #14-15 in the TISSUES 2.0
list, while the heart and cardiovascular system #12-13. Nervous and reproductive systems are ranked
as, #16-17 and #1-10, respectively.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

3.2. Construction of the complete ACE2 network
By using available literature and interactome data, we made an attempt to construct the ACE2
network as complete as possible based on the interactions with other genes and proteins. We
developed the network based on three assumptions from the network medicine field: (i) disease
module hypothesis: gene-products associated with the same disease phenotype tend to form a
cluster in the PPI network; (ii) network parsimony: shortest paths between known disease genes
often coincide with disease pathways; (iii) local hypothesis: gene products associated with similar
diseases are likely to strongly interact with each other [36]. Besides protein-protein interactions, we
also included genes that showed correlated expression with ACE2, taking into account that these
genes could not yet have a strong representation in PPI databases. The aim of this synthesis was to
gather available knowledge regarding ACE2 interactome which could be useful for interpreting new
findings in the context of the disease and could be further narrowed down by using their own
expression or proteomic data. In our work, we used expression data from Tissues 2.0 for subsetting
tissue-specific sub-networks and Gene Ontology to identify virus specific-proteins. This complete
ACE2 network also provided a starting point for our new analysis added to the manuscript of
SARS-CoV-2 infected hiPSC-CMs, where those 68 genes served as a seed nodes for the NERI
algorithm which integrated co-expression networks with PPI networks.
From 68 genes included to complete the ACE2 network, only two didn’t show any interactions
according to the String database which we used for the visualization of the network (Figure 3 A).
This figure depicts the complexity of this disease, presenting the possible primary alterations
following SARS-CoV-2 infection, on proteins level, and the secondary alterations, on gene
expression level (including initial ACE2 downregulation and later ACE2 overexpression). The genes
from the ACE2 network were sorted using circular sorting by the number of connections with other
genes to simplify the visualization. The workflow of the bioinformatic analyses performed in this
study is shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2. The workflow of bioinformatic analyses. (A) data collection to construct complete ACE2
network; (B) generation of the complete ACE2 network as well as tissue-specific sub-networks; (C)
ACE2-related co-expression network analysis of pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes
(hiPSC-CMs) 72h post-infection with SARS-CoV2 using NERI algorithm; (D) Enrichment analysis of
signalling pathways and diseases related to alterations in ACE2 networks; (E) integration of
complete ACE2 network with NERI; and (F) miRNA prediction analysis in ACE2 related networks.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

3.2.1. Identification of genes showing the highest connectivity within complete ACE2 network
Analysis of the complete interaction network between ACE2 and associated genes showed, as
expected, the highest number of interactions between ACE2 and other genes (49 interactions),
followed by ACE, which was not directly connected with ACE2 (33 interactions), renin (REN, 32
interactions), insulin (INS, 31 interactions), kininogen 1 (KNG1, 30 interactions) and
angiotensinogen (AGT, 28 interactions) (Figure 3 A).
Identification of the virus infection-related proteins within complete ACE2 network
Analysis of the ACE2 interaction network revealed 11 genes associated with virus
infection-related ontological terms (ACE2, DPP4, ANPEP, CCL2, TFRC, MEP1A, ADAM17, FABP2,
NPC1, CLEC4M, TMPRSS2) which could be especially affected in SARS-CoV-2 infection, leading to
disturbance of the network. All these genes were connected directly with ACE2 according to the
String database, except for gene FABP2 (6 interactions with other genes) and CCL2 (15 interactions).
From this group, the highest degree of connectivity with other genes from the network was found
for DPP4 (22 interactions), ANPEP (19 interactions), and CCL2 indirectly connected with ACE2 (15
interactions, as presented before). Two genes CDHR2 and MS4A10 didn’t have any known
connections with other genes according to the String database, for edge confidence score cut-off >0.4.
3.2.2. Sub-setting of the tissues-specific ACE-2 related networks
We also made subsets of complete ACE2networkto show interactions for heart tissue, lungs,
nervous system as well as virus-infection related proteins. Tissue-specific networks were selected
based on their tissue expression confidence in analyzed tissues. These enabled us to evaluate
similarities between selected tissues to predict the impact of ACE2 alterations in the heart tissue.
Lung tissue was selected based on how affected it is by the SARS-CoV-2 infection and served as the
control for our analysis. Nervous tissue was selected due to multiple neurological symptoms
recently reported as associated with COVID19 disease [37].
We set this score as 2, which is relatively high taking into account scores for the genes from this
database. For all tissues, the median expression confidence score was 0.914, for the heart was 0.989,
lung 1.319, nervous system 1.556. We found 48 genes from 68 overlapped between tissue-specific
networks, 8 of them were virus-infection related proteins (Fig 3 B). This ACE2-interactome also
provided a starting point for our analysis of ACE2 coexpression networks in cardiomyocytes
performed in this study, where those 68 genes served as seed nodes for the NERI algorithm which
integrated co-expression networks with PPI networks.
Descriptions of the genes from the complete ACE2 network and link to its interactive version
are available in Supplementary Table 2.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 3. Predicted ACE2 interaction network. (A) Complete ACE2 network visualized as two circles
sorted by the number of connections (degree) with other nodes. The external circle depicts the first level
ACE2 interactors; the internal circle depicts the second level of interactors, with genes that do not connect
directly with ACE2. For clarity, on the main figure, we showed only the edges associated with virus-related
proteins (gene id in red). Edges associated with virus-related proteins are shown in red for first-level (direct)
and in grey for the second-level (indirect) ACE2 interactors. Inset in the top right depicts the additional
information for each gene/protein, as associated processes (blue letters), associated diseases (color-label
ring), and expression confidence across key tissues (black bars). Inset in the bottom right depicts the same
network including all edges. The genes from the ACE2 network were sorted using a circular layout
organizing the genes by the number of connections with other genes which enabled us to hide the edges to
simplify visualization. Thus, genes present on the bottom toward the right of the circular network showed
the highest connectivity within the network. Notice that the closest ACE2 interactors are ACE, REN and
INS, which play a central role in the pathophysiology of a number of cardiovascular disorders. The
following interactor is KNG1, essential for blood coagulation and assembly of the kallikrein-kinin system
and AGT influencing the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) function. In the network are present 11
virus-infection-related proteins (red labels) forming a dense connection with ACE2 and its top interactors
which can affect its functionality. (B) Subsets of ACE2 network containing only highly expressed proteins in
the heart, lung, and nervous system; analogous network for virus-related proteins (right). From the genes
which didn’t have direct interactions with ACE2, the gene ACE showed the highest connectivity.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

3.3. Analysis of changes in ACE2 co-expression network in infected cardiomyocytes
To evaluate how alteration in the ACE2 network can affect cardiomyocytes we re-analyzed the
GSE150392 GEO dataset for pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) 72h
post-infection with SARS-CoV2. We utilized algorithm NERI [28],[38] that integrates the PPI
interactome data with co-expression networks to take a closer look at this part of the cardiomyocyte
co-expression network. We used 68 genes from the predicted ACE2 network as seed genes, to focus
on this region of the transcriptome. The goal of this analysis was to identify the genes and
interactions between them that could be affected by the alterations in the ACE2 protein network
caused by the virus and impact the functionality of cardiomyocytes. By assuming some network
medicine hypothesis, the method explored the neighborhood of a gene set by locating paths
possessing more coexpressed genes with seeds - this is independently performed for two conditions
(control and disease). This approach enabled us to identify a cluster of hub genes also called
“bottleneck regulators”, with corroborating signals across transcript and protein expression data
leading to pathological changes in cardiomyocytes even when they show little or no changes in
expression. In order to identify those genes, we selected nodes and edges in which Rank scores
generated by NERI ranged from 1 to 200 in terms of the difference in co-expression between control
and disease (Rank Delta) and changes in connectivity (Rank X).
3.3.1 Identification of the ACE-2 related bottleneck genes related to corrupted co-expression
networks
We identified 139 bottleneck genes, four of them CAT, AGT, AGTRAP, MME (reduced
co-expression networks) and ATP6AP2 (enhanced co-expression networks) were also present
among ACE2 seed genes. Decreased co-expression networks among top bottleneck genes were
observed for EGFR, FN1, TP53, FBXO6, RNF2, ELAVL1, PCNA, and HSP90AA1. While the strongest
increase in co-expression network was observed for bottleneck genes NTRK, COPS6, RAD51, PTEN,
PSMA3, FRMD5, TRIM25 and APP.
3.3.2. Identification of the most altered connections between ACE2-related bottleneck genes
We also observed an enhancement of the coexpression network for EWSR1. Moreover, most
enhanced interactions were between HSP90AA1-MAST2 and ISYNA1(ACE2 interactor ) with
TRIM25. The most diminished interactions were between APP-MAST2 and EGFR-MAST2.
3.3.3. Identification of the most altered connections between ACE2-related seed genes and bottleneck
genes
Analysis of interactions between the seed genes and bottleneck genes showed the strongest
alterations in the connection between CALM1 and RNF2 involved in cardiac development 9Figure 4
B). Also, analysis of the alterations connections between seed genes showed affected ACE2-CALM1
interaction (RankDelta=60, Rank X=155) and AGT-MME (Rank Delta=85, RankX=63). ACE2 placed in
terms of Rank Delta on place 115, and Rank X 257 from 7844. In total, we identified 34 from our 69
seed genes showing changes in-expression networks. Fourteen of them were co-expressed with each
other (Figure 5A)
3.3.4. Identification of the most altered connections between ACE2-related seed genes
The strongest interaction between ACE2 and other genes was for seed gene CALM1 (Rank
Delta=2280, Rank X=155). Generally, seeds were not expected to have high-Rank X scores unless they
were not a hub of interactions for other seed genes

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. Alteration of ACE-2 networks in cardiomyocytes infected with SARS-CoV-2. (A) ACE-2
related bottleneck genes obtained by analyzing expression data of pluripotent stem cell-derived
cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) after 72 hours of infection with SARS-CoV2. The network was
constructed by using the NERI algorithm which integrates protein-protein interaction (PPI) Biogrid
network with gene co-expression network. For clarity, we selected top genes and edges which had
Rank Delta and Rank S score higher than 200; additionally, we showed nodes with the highest NERI
scores which didn’t have associated edges with high scores. Genes marked with orange triangles
showed direct interaction with SARS-Cov-2 [39]. Notice that EGFR and APP showed the strongest
alterations in their co-expression networks. (B) PPI network between top coexpressed bottleneck
genes from panel A (circular shapes) and seed genes (diamond shapes) related to the complete ACE2
network identified by us using data mining. The size of the nodes and weight of the edges is
associated with Rank X score, related to biological importance, while color is associated with Rank
Delta, related to the difference in co-expression network between control and disease. Notice that
ACE2 shows a reduced number of connections, consistent with its initial downregulation in the early
stage of infection; in later stages of infection, we can expect an inversion of observed regulation
caused by the virus-relatedACE2 overexpression [40].

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

3.4. Enrichment analysis of the signalling within ACE2-tissue-specific network
In order to compare our in silico predictions of the ACE2 network with its co-expression
changes in infected cardiomyocytes, we performed enrichment analysis of signalling pathways
using the EnrichR website (Fig 5). The aim was also to correlate those results with later disease
predictions. We used 68 genes from the complete ACE-network and its subnetworks in the heart,
lungs, and nervous system, as well as the top 139 bottleneck genes identified by the NERI algorithm
as most affected by the SARS-Cov-2 infection. Enrichment analysis of those networks showed
multiple shared pathways associated with disease-related signalling, TGF-beta regulation of
extracellular matrix, renin-angiotensin pathway, Alzheimer-disease, AP-1 transcription factor
network. Among top pathways shared between complete ACE2 networks, subnetworks and ACE2
network in cardiomyocytes, we observed many terms directly associated with heart functions for
example microRNAs in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, EGF receptor transactivation by GPCRs in
cardiac hypertrophy, actions of nitric oxide in the heart, corticosteroids and cardioprotection. We
also observed significant enrichment in all analyzed datasets of cellular senescence, apelin
signalling, AGE-RAGE signalling pathway in diabetic complications, and estrogen signalling
pathway identified using the KEGG database.
By comparing the complete ACE2 network to the co-expression in the hiPSC-CMs network, we
observed in the former one a higher number of genes associated with renin-angiotensin related
signalling, ACE inhibitor pathway, renin secretion, protein digestion, and absorption. On the other
hand, in infected cardiomyocytes, there are more genes related to cell cycle signalling, interleukin-2
signalling, cancer-related pathways, T cell receptor regulation of apoptosis, and hemostasis
pathway. Additionally, the platelet-degranulation pathway was enriched in infected
cardiomyocytes, but also in heart and lung subnetworks, but not in the complete ACE2 network.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 5. ACE2 network in infected hiPSC-CMs and top signalling pathways enriched in ACE2
interaction networks. (A) ACE2 related genes identified using data mining and co-expression
network in stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) 72 hours after infection. Pathway
enrichment analysis of the complete ACE2 network (68 genes) and 139 top bottleneck genes
identified in ACE2 related co-expression network analysis for hiPSC-CMs. Notice that the strongest
altered interaction was between AGT-MME and ACE2 and CALM1, and the strongest affected nodes
are AGT and CAT. (B) Bioplanet database (top 30 pathways) and (C) KEGG database (additional
pathways not present in Bioplanet). Virus-infection related proteins from the complete ACE2
network are marked with red font. All circles presented on the graph are associated with
significantly enriched pathways (FDR corrected p-value <0.05). In this analysis, we also included
ACE2-sub-networks for heart, lungs, and nervous system, but due to high similarity with results for
the complete ACE2 network, we excluded them from the figure for better clarity.

3.5. Enrichment analysis of the disease terms associated with ACE2-tissue-specific network
In order to identify the disease traits which would be helpful in precise identification of the risk
groups of patients with COVID-19, we performed an enrichment analysis of the DisGenet disease
and Rare Diseases AutoRIF database using the EnrichR website to evaluate phenotypes associated
with ACE2 interaction in different tissues. This analysis guides the identification of phenotypes that
can be triggered by ACE2-network alterations in selected tissues heart, lungs, nervous system,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

hiPSC-CMs as well as virus-protein-related network and complete ACE2 network. Moreover, the
analysis of rare traits, usually related to single genes enabled us to precisely characterize the
consequences of alterations in the specific genes from the ACE2-network.
3.5.1. Analysis of the ACE2-related common diseases
The analysis of non-cancerous diseases in the DisGenet database revealed that the highest
number of genes from all analyzed networks was associated with the following disease phenotypes
(in the decreasing order): numerous cancerous diseases, obesity, hypertensive disease,
non-insulin-dependent DM, congestive HF, coronary artery disease and atherosclerosis and were
observed in all analyzed networks (Figure 6A). Enriched terms not enriched in the virus-related
network, but containing virus-infection related genes were: Alzheimer's disease, heart failure,
diabetes mellitus, asthma and rheumatoid arthritis. Alzheimer's disease and leukemia were the
strongest enriched term in infected cardiomyocytes.
3.5.2. Analysis of the ACE2-related cancerous diseases
Cancerous diseases were suggested for the separate graph by using cancer-related key-words
and showed the strongest enrichment of breast cancers and prostate-related cancers as well as
general carcinogenesis-related processes including neoplasms metastasis (Figure 6B)
3.5.2. Analysis of the ACE2-related rare diseases
The analysis focused on rare diseases revealed that the most significant ones were SARS,
blood-coagulation-related diseases (Marburg hemorrhagic fever, hereditary hemorrhagic
telangiectasia, plasma thromboplastin deficiency, Coats disease), and multiple diseases associated
with hypertension (Kallikrein hypertension and aortic coarctation) (Figure 6C). Among rare
diseases, we also observed significant enrichment of Eclampsia (average 7.1 genes from each
dataset), HELLP syndrome (average 6.3 genes from each dataset) and Kawasaki disease (average 3.3
genes from each dataset) observed occasionally in COVID-19 [41].

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 6. Top potential COVID-19risk groups are significantly associated with ACE2 interaction
networks. Risk groups are characterized (A) common, (B) cancerous and (C) rare diseases. This list is
based on enrichment analysis of DisGeNET, analyzed through the EnrichR database. We performed
disease enrichment analysis in the complete ACE2 network (left-most column of symbols), subsets of
this network expressed in the heart, lung, and nervous system; we performed this same analysis also
for 11 virus-infection related proteins (right-most column) and ACE2-coexpression network in stem
cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) after 72 hours of infection. Diseases marked with asterisks
include the ACE2 gene. For heart, lung and nervous system tissue, we used the cutoff of expression
confidence >2, obtained from the Tissue2.0 database. All circles presented on the graph are associated
with significantly enriched disease terms (FDR corrected p-value <0.05). Top cancer-related diseases
are shown on panel B and were subset from the Common diseases by using cancer-related keywords.
Notice that top diseases are already known as major risk groups in COVID-19.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

3.6. Integration of ACE2 network with SARS-CoV-2/Human Interactome
To identify how the ACE2 network is connected with the SARS-CoV-2/Human Interactome and
how it could affect the heart, we combined the previously published SARS-CoV-2 interactome [39]
with our complete ACE2 network and top findings from the co-expression network analysis in
hiPSC-CMs 72 hours after infection.

3.6.1. Identification of ACE2-related genes interacting with the virus proteins
We found that three proteins from our network, ACE2, CLEC4M, and TMPRSS2, are directly
interacting with virus glycoprotein S. Also top bottleneck nodes identified in NERI analysis CAV1,
UBE2I, and IKBKB showed connections with virus proteins ORF3a, N and M. In total, 45 proteins
from the complete ACE2 network are interacting with 38 from 94 human host proteins for
SARS-CoV-2.
3.6.2. Identification of ACE2-related genes interacting with the host proteins
We also found that SARS-CoV-2 interactome strongly connects with 23 bottleneck genes which
were also the strongest affected in hiPSC-CMs co-expression network analysis including EGFR,
APP, FN1, TP53. SARS-CoV-2 interactome strongly connects with the complete ACE2 network
through INS, CDK4, CCL2, and ALB, all of them associated with atherosclerosis processes. The
strongest connection between the complete ACE2 network and SARS-CoV-2/Human Interactome
was with INS, which interacted with 12 host proteins from SARS-CoV-2/Human Interactome. Other
top interactors were seed genes CAT, CCL2, CDK4, CALM1 connected with at least 6 host proteins.
The strongest interaction for ACE2-related co-expression networks in hiPSC-CMs was between
HSP90AA1 and TP53 connected with 16 host proteins from SARS interactome. Among host proteins
directly interacting with virus proteins, the strongest connection with the ACE2 network occurs by
ALB (30 interactors form ACE2 network) and CAV1 (13 interactors) which had affected the
co-expression network after virus infection in hiPSC-CMs (Figure 7).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 7. Combined ACE2 network with SARS-CoV-2/Human interactome and co-expression network in
infected hiPSC-CMs. (A) Nodes identified in the co-expression network analysis of infected hiPSC-CMs using
the NERI algorithm and showing the highest connectivity with SARS-CoV-2/Human interactome (top 15
genes). (B) SARS-CoV-2/Human interactome as shown in previously published work [39]. (C) ACE2 network
components which interact with SARS-CoV-2/Human interactome proteins. Nodes from network A which have
the highest connectivity are shown are sorted from right to left. Nodes from the networks B and C are circularly
sorted by the number of connections with virus interactome. Virus proteins are shown as orange octagons,
while virus-infection related human proteins have red labels.

3.7. ACE2 network-related miRNA predictions
In order to identify miRNAs which could play a regulatory role in COVID19, and especially its
cardiovascular consequences, we performed miRNA-target predictions using the following sets of
genes: 69 genes from the complete ACE2 network, gene lists from its subnetworks for heart, lungs,
nervous system, virus-related proteins, as well as top bottleneck genes from the ACE2 co-expression
network in hiPSC-CMs. Because among top nodes identified in the co-expression analysis of
hiPSC-CMs were present only four seed genes, we decided to include for target predictions also
ACE-related seed genes which showed interactions with the top bottleneck genes. For improving the
precision of predictions, we analyzed miRNAs that showed expression in blood, serum, or plasma
according to the Tissues2.0 database. In further analyses, we focused on miRNAs which regulated
the highest number of the genes from the network as well including ACE2. Analysis of the top 10
miRNAs regulating each from those 7 networks revealed overall 10 miRNAs regulating also ACE2
gene (Figure 8a). Seven of them (hsa-miR-302c-5p, hsa-miR-27a-3p, hsa-miR-1305, hsa-miR-587,
hsa-miR-26b-5p, hsa-miR-10b-5p, hsa-miR-200b-3p) were also regulating high number of
virus-related proteins (Figure 8B). Among miRNAs shared across analyzed networks that were not

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

regulating ACE2 but were present among the top 10 in all analyzed datasets, we identified
i.a.hsa-miR-124-3p, hsa-miR-34a-5p, hsa-miR- 548c-3p and hsa-miR-16-5p.

Figure 8. Top 20 potential miRNA modulators of the ACE2 network in COVID-19. (A) Top
miRNAs regulating the highest number of genes within all ACE2 related-networks. Pink squares are
showing if miRNA was present among the top 10 miRNAs in a given dataset. (B) Interaction network
between virus-infection related proteins (red labels) and top miRNAs regulating ACE2 and shared
between analyzed networks and regulating at least 4 virus-related proteins from the complete
network. Numbers on the right side of the miRNAs depict the number of targeted genes within the
network. CCL2 and FABP2 genes are not direct interactors of the ACE2, so they are presented
outside of the ACE2-interactors box. “S” refers to SARS-CoV-2 S spike glycoprotein.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

4. Discussion
In the current study, we characterized the interaction between SARS-CoV-2 infection and ACE2
functional networks with a focus on CVD. Using an integrative multi-omic approach, we described
the ACE2 interaction network and evaluated its expression using the hiPSC-CMs dataset. This
approach of integrating multiple sources of biological data used in our study is becoming
increasingly popular [42]. There are currently numerous databases integrating, and systematizing
data from different levels of biological regulation making this knowledge easily accessible. To
improve the identification and prioritization of genes associated with complex diseases, some works
began to integrate PPI networks with information derived from other omics data, which have
contributed to a better understanding of gene functions, interactions, and pathways [25,43][44]. The
integration of PPI networks and gene expression data has improved disease classification and
identification of disease-specific deregulated pathways also in COVID19 [45][46][47].
The main findings of our analysis are the following: (1) Expression of ACE2 is similar in lungs
and heart, which provides a rationale why the cardiovascular system is also a target of SARS-CoV-2
infection; (2) Our analysis of co-expression networks in infected hiPSC-CMs identified multiple
genes and interactions associated with cardiovascular risk factors;(3) SARS-CoV-2 binding to the
ACE2 receptor leads to major disturbances in signalling pathways linked to cardiac adverse
outcomes in COVID19; (4) Analysis of ACE2 interaction networks revealed its association with
numerous diseases including main COVID19 co-morbidities. (5) Analysis of the SARS-CoV-2
interactome revealed extensive connections with the with the top regulators of the ACE2 network;
(6)We identified multiple miRNAs regulating ACE2 network (hsa-miR-302c-5p, hsa-miR-27a-3p,
hsa-miR-1305, hsa-miR-587, hsa-miR-26b-5p, hsa-miR-10b-5p, hsa-miR-200b-3p; hsa-miR-124-3p
and hsa-miR-16-5p).
Our hypothesis states that major implications of COVID19 cardiovascular outcomes are related
to alteration in ACE2 receptor signalling associated with SARS-CoV-2 binding. Due to the difference
between tissue-specific ACE2 networks, different pathological processes can be triggered in
different organs. Our comparative analysis of multiple tissues showed consistency in crucial
pathways including RAS signalling. This could help explain cardiac abnormalities presented in
COVID-19 patients, including elevated troponin, myocarditis, arrhythmias, and sudden cardiac
death [48]. Moreover, as the myocardial interaction network of ACE2 and its own expression is
altered in patients with coexisting CVD, SARS-CoV-2 infection may result in greater damage to
cardiomyocytes and account for greater disease acuity and poorer survival. This is consistent with
recent data regarding the analysis of RNA-seq data of SARS-Cov-2 infected patients alongside
controls: ACE2 network alteration seems to be the source of most recognized manifestations of
COVID19 disease [40].
4.1. The high expression of ACE2 in the cardiovascular system explains why SARS-CoV-2 infection may target
the heart
The analysis focused on the ACE2 tissue-specific expression showed that lungs and respiratory
systems have similar ACE2 and TMPRSS2 expressions as in heart and cardiovascular systems and
nervous systems. Recent publications regarding the impact of SARS-CoV-2 on the heart tissue
showed that indeed cardiomyocytes can be infected with the virus [13][14].
4.2. The high expression of ACE2 in the reproductive system and endocrine glands and enrichment of cancerous
diseases related to those organs suggest wider implications of SARS-CoV-2
In our analyses, we also observed strong confidence in ACE2 expression in urogenital and
endocrine tissues. Moreover, we found in the genitourinary tract the highest expression of TMPRSS2
gene that is known to positively regulate viral entry into the host cell via proteolytic cleavage of
ACE2. In fact, there are studies supporting the high expression of ACE2 in the urogenital tissues
[49][50][51] and endocrine tissues [52], additionally, there are increasing evidence of symptoms, like
male infertility [53][54], urinary tract inflammation linked to viral cystitis [55], and transmission of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

the virus through urine [56]. On the other hand, so far qPCR experiments to detect SARS-CoV-2 in
semen and testicular biopsy didn’t find signs of virus infection [50]. We hypothesize that in this case
disturbances in urogenital tissues could be associated with alternative regulation of the ACE2
network. Additionally, our analyses using the NERI algorithm showed strong alterations in
cancer-related TP53, NTRK, COPS6, and RAD51 co-expression network and exceptionally high
enrichment of cancerous processes associated with reproductive organs. Thus, our prediction is that
additional impacts of SARS-CoV-2 infection can be observed much later than acute infection.
Interestingly, TP53 is considered a master regulator of maintenance of cardiac tissue transcriptomic
homeostasis [57].
4.2. ACE, REN, INS, KNG1, and AGT play role in cardiovascular risk factors related to SARS-CoV-2 binding
to the ACE2 receptor
In our study ACE, REN, INS, KNG1, and AGT showed the highest connectivity within the
complete ACE2 network and association with enriched diseases that are known to be a risk factor for
a severe course of COVID-19. Our analysis of the data related to infected hiPSC-CMs confirmed
changes in co-expression networks of ACE, AGT (also present among bottleneck genes), and KNG1.
Both ACE and AGT also showed differential expressions in hiPSC-CMs. On the other hand,
expression levels of INS, and REN were very low thus suggesting rather their role in other than
cardiac tissues. ACE and ACE2interplay with the RAS pathway and plasma kallikrein-kinin system
(KKS) which component is KNG1, a hormonal pathway that modulates the intrinsic blood
coagulation system, angiogenesis, the complement pathway and bradykinin-related inflammation.
Deregulation of KKS may result in thromboembolic complications and lead to sepsis exacerbation in
infections [58–60]. Deregulation of AGT which is a crucial component of the RAS pathway is
associated with the pathogenesis of essential hypertension and atrial fibrillation.
4.3. Analysis of infected hiPSC-CMs using the NERI algorithm revealed affected co-expression networks
ofEGFR, APP, and CALM1 implicating their role in cardiac and thromboembolic complications
EGFR loss in vascular smooth muscle cells and cardiomyocytes leads to arterial hypotension
and cardiac hypertrophy [61]. EGFR was found as a pivotal regulator of thrombin-mediated
inflammation. It also plays a role in changes from lethal versus non-lethal influenza infections
[56,62]. EGFR showed decreased signalling in infected hiPSC-CMs.
APP is a precursor protein for Amyloid-beta (Aβ) peptide which is massively released from the
blood to nearby tissue upon the activation of platelets and has strong antibiotic activity against
viruses, bacteria, and fungi [63]. Accumulation of Aβ in tissues is observed in Alzheimer’s disease,
glaucoma, cancerous disease, myocardium with diastolic dysfunction, and the placenta during
preeclampsia [64,65]. All those diseases were enriched in our study. APP showed an increased
co-expression network in infected hiPSC-CMs. Identification of this interplay between EGFR and
APP can play an important role in intervention targets in COVID19 treatment.
The analysis focused on close ACE2 interactors revealed its strongly affected connection with
CALM1 in infected hiPSC-CMs. CALM1 regulates the function of ion channels playing a role in
platelet aggregation and cardiomyocytes activity. It is also an important ACE2 interactor playing a
role in viral pathogenesis [66,67]. In our analysis, CALM1 showed interactions also with bottleneck
node PTEN affecting cardiomyocytes contractions and growth.
4.4. Alterations in the ACE2 interaction network can aggravate major comorbidities in COVID19 through
related signalling pathways
Our analysis of ACE2 interaction networks including co-expression networks in infected
cardiomyocytes showed that change in ACE2 receptor activity can lead to significant disturbances in
signalling pathways linked to well-known complications in COVID-19. Those pathways included
TGF-beta regulation of extracellular matrix, renin-angiotensin system AP-1 transcription factor
network, apelin signalling, AGE-RAGE signalling pathway in diabetic complications, and estrogen

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

signalling Signalling pathways the most affected in hiPSC-CMs were related to cell cycle (i.a.
Pathways in cancer, PI3K-Akt signalling pathway), immune system (i.a. interleukin-2 signalling
pathway, T-cell receptor regulation of apoptosis), hemostasis and platelet activation. Those results
were supported by our subsequent analysis of disease-related phenotypes which are the major
comorbidities in COVID19 cancerous diseases, obesity, hypertensive disease, diabetes, and
Alzheimer's disease.
4.5. Renin-angiotensin pathway, AGE-RAGE, and Apelin signalling as fundamental mediators of the blood
pressure dysregulation mediated through ACE2 in COVID-19
In our in silico analysis using ACE2 functional networks, we found that RAS/ACE2,
AGE-RAGE, and Apelin signalling pathways play an important role in SARS-CoV-2 infection. These
pathways have a crucial role in the pathogenesis of DM, CVD, and blood pressure regulations.
Abnormalities of ACE2/RAS pathway signalling and deregulation of angiotensin II as a fundamental
mediator of this axis are closely related to the pathophysiology of hypertension and progression of
cardiovascular remodeling [68] [69]. Therefore, binding of the SARS-CoV-2 to the ACE2 receptor
leading to disturbances in the pathways of these key regulators might explain the adverse outcome
in COVID-19 patients with the coexistence of the above mentioned clinical conditions. Also, apelin
signalling is involved in many physiological processes such as energy metabolism, blood pressure
regulation, and cardiac contractility and plays an important role in organ and tissue pathologies
including, DM, obesity, HF as well as HIV-1 infection [70]. After the virus enters the cells, ACE2 is
likely to decrease its activity, thus favoring an increase of the ACE/ACE2 balance toward the
prevalence of ACE arm in the RAS which causes an increase of ROS production, vasoconstriction,
and inflammation [71]. On the other hand, a recent COVID-19 related study showed decreased
expression of ACE in combination with increases in ACE2 likely causing bradykinin-related
increases in vascular dilation, vascular permeability and hypotension explaining many of the
symptoms being observed in COVID-19 [40].
4.6. The role of virus-infection related proteins from ACE2 network in COVID-19 adverse outcomes
Analysis of the connection between SARS-CoV-2 interactome revealed direct interaction of the
virus glycoprotein S with three of 11 virus-infection related proteins identified incomplete ACE2
network (ACE2, CLEC4M, and TMPRSS2). We also identified DE bottleneck nodes (CAV1, UBE2I)
interacting with other virus proteins. Interestingly, CAV1 was identified as a possible alternative
receptor for SARS-CoV and Canine respiratory coronavirus (CRCoV), which may be associated with
the virus infection, replication, assembly, and budding [72][72,73]. CAV1 showed an enhanced
co-expression network. Additionally, we observed multiple connections between host genes from
virus interactome and most affected genes in hiPSC-CMs. Those genes included TP53, HSP90AA1
but also ESR1, FN1, APP and EGFR and seed genes CAT, AGT, AGTRAP, DPP, CCL2 and MME.
The especially interesting genes are discussed below.
HSP90AA1 was recently shown in pre-print as reducing SARS-CoV- 2 viral replication, and
TNF and IL1B mRNA levels [74]. Additionally, in our analysis, the strongest affected interaction in
cardiomyocytes was observed between HSP90AA1 and MAST2. MAST2 regulates IL12 production
in macrophages and shows association with red blood cell distribution width which was identified
recently as a biomarker of COVID19 mortality [75]. Interestingly, MAST2 also showed an affected
connection with the top bottleneck gene APP. HSP90AA1 and seed gene CAT showed significant
differential expression and a strong reduction in co-expression networks in infected hiPSC-CMs in
our study. CAT is considered the most effective catalyst for the decomposition of H2O2, regulating
the production of cytokines, protecting from oxidative injury, and repressing replication of
SARS-CoV-2 [76].
FN1 in our study showed decreased signalling in hiPSC-CMs. FN1 inhibition attenuates fibrosis
and improves cardiac function in a model of heart failure [77]. Interaction of human plasma
fibronectin with viral proteins of HIV suggests that it's binding to virus particles may reduce viremia
and thus may be involved in the clearance of viral proteins from the cells [78].

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Higher plasma DPP4 can be found among patients with obesity, metabolic syndrome, and DM,
who are at risk of a severe course of COVID-19 [79]. DPP4 knock-in mice were found more
susceptible to MERS-CoV infections which resulted in the severe inflammatory response and lethal
lung disease.[80,81] Therefore, it should be further investigated whether DPP4 inhibitors, widely
used for the treatment of DM, may act as therapeutic drugs for ARDS caused by SARS-CoV-2
infection.[82] Our study revealed the possible interaction between DPP and EGFR which was
identified as the most affected gene in co-expression network analysis.
Among affected virus-related-infection proteins, we also identified CCL2. CCL2 protein has
been implicated in lung inflammatory disorders and contributes to the development of pulmonary
fibrosis [23,83]. It is worth mentioning that among SARS-CoV-infected patients the level of
pro-inflammatory cytokines, especially CCL2 and TGF‐β1 (both affected in infected hiPSC-CMs)
were increased in cells expressing ACE2, while this could not be seen in tissue with undetectable
ACE2 expression [84]. A comparable pattern of inflammatory cytokines was found in SARS-CoV-2
infection as well [85]. This makes CCL2 a promising link between ACE2 and cytokine storm
associated with severe COVID-19 disease.
Altogether, our results suggest that not only ACE2 is affected by the entrance of the virus to the
cardiomyocytes, but that this virus also affects multiple of ACE-2 interactors and that the ACE-2
network can be as well a part of virus propagation machinery.
4.7 miRNAs as promising antiviral modulators of the ACE2 network and a potential biomarker of HF
associated with COVID-19
In the initial step of our study we identified miRNAs that may regulate the expression of ACE2
networks and related processes. To our best knowledge, we present here a novel results on a
potential role of miRNAs as a diagnostic and prognostic tool in heart muscle injury in the course of
SARS-CoV-2 infection.
miR-1305 and miR-587: TGF-β signalling pathway regulators in HF progression
MiR-1305 and miR-587 were found to regulate the expression of TGF-β pathway members
related to virus infections and lymphocytes T activation, SMAD3, and SMAD4 [86,87][88][89],
ventricular remodeling, myocardial fibrosis and hypertrophy and, as a result, HF progression [90].
The highest expression of miR-587 was found in platelets of patients with acute coronary syndrome
and was closely related to the severity of coronary artery stenosis [91].
miR-26b-5p: anti-fibrotic agent and AGTR1-dependent hypertension modulator
In our study, we found that miR-26b-5p may play an important role in the pathogenesis of HF
in COVID-19 patients. Noteworthy, literature data suggest that AGTR1 can modulate hypertension,
via the regulation of miR-26b-5p in arachidonic acid metabolism. Additionally, miR-26b-5p has an
anti-fibrotic effect in the liver, in the diabetic mouse myocardium, and in Ang-II-induced mouse
cardiac fibroblasts [92].
miR-302c-5p: potential antiviral therapeutic and biomarker of HF
Another miRNA from our network affecting ACE2 was miR-302c-5p playing an important role
in many viral infections [93–95]. A study reported an association between the miR-302, cytokine
storm and showed the potential of miR-302 as an antiviral therapeutic [95]. Our bioinformatic
analysis for the first time showed the importance of miR-302c-5p in SARS-CoV-2 infection. Apart
from the crucial function of miR-302 in viral infections, it may be also associated with CVD [96,97],
as circulating miR-302 was positively correlated with NT-proBNP levels in acute HF patients and
showed strong potential as a novel biomarker for the diagnosis and the differentiation of disease
severity of acute HF [96].
miR-27a-3p: a potential biomarker of acute HF and NF-κB signalling regulator
Also, miR-27a-3p targeting ACE2 and other genes from its network in our study were found to
be involved in the inflammatory response and oxidative stress through several pathways including
PPAR‐γ, NF-κB, and PI3K/AKT/Nrf2 signalling [98–100]. In the animal model of acute lung injury,
expression of miR-27a-3p in alveolar macrophages was significantly decreased, while
overexpression of miR-27a-3p suppressed NF-κB activation and alleviated acute lung injury by

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

binding to its target NFKB1 [98]. Moreover, it was also found that miR-27a-3p may target pathways
related to atherosclerosis, and may act as a potential biomarker of acute HF [101,102].
hsa-miR-16-5p: modulates inflammatory signalling and cytokines including IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α, NF-κB
mTOR-related pathways
hsa-miR-16-5p was found to affect a phenotypic change of T cells, modulate inflammatory
signalling and cytokines including IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α, NF-κB mTOR-related pathways and
genes [103,104]. Additionally, MiR-16-5p has been linked with the pathogenesis of several infectious
diseases such as HIV-1 infection and malaria [105–107]. It is worth mentioning that miR-16-5p as a
plasma diagnostic biomarker is able to distinguish severe and mild viral infections [108] and early
HIV-1 infection from healthy individuals [106,109].
hsa-miR-124-3p: has potentially an aggravating role in cardiovascular consequences of COVID19
MiR-124-3p was identified by us as regulating the highest number of genes in hiPSC-CMs.
Literature data show its aggravating role in failing hearts by suppressing CD151-facilitated
angiogenesis in the heart [110]. miR-124-3p dysregulates NSC maintenance through repression of
the transferrin receptor (TFRC) in Zika virus infection [111]. TFRC is linked with cardiomyopathy
and was identified in our study as closely interacting with ACE2 in infected cardiomyocytes and
strongly connected with SARS interactome.
5. Conclusions
This comprehensive analysis provides novel information regarding the complexity of signalling
pathways of SARS-CoV-2 infection affecting the cardiovascular system with a focus on
cardiomyocytes and forms a basis for the creation of predictive tools and introduction of therapy to
improve outcome in COVID-19, and therefore has a potential to reduce economic consequences of
the global pandemic. We believe that the results of our analysis could be further validated in
laboratory and clinical settings and help to create a paradigm for future studies in this field.
MiRNAs identified for the first time in this study can serve as potential biomarkers helping with the
identification of the pathological changes in COVID-19 or serve as therapeutic targets due to their
stability in the serum, forming a basis for personalized therapy.
Supplementary Materials:

Supp Table 1. List of GO terms used for annotation of the genes to specific processes and functions.
Supp Table 2. Description of genes associated with complete ACE2 interaction network
Author Contributions: Bioinformatic analysis: Z.W., S.N.S, D.C.M, Writing—original draft preparation, Z.W.,
C.E., D.J., J.M.S.-M., M.P.; writing-review and editing, Z.W., C.E., D.J., R.P., J.M.S.-M., M.P.; visualization, Z.W.,
C.E., R.P.; supervision, Z.W., J.M.S.-M., and M.P. The article was published as a result of the collaboration
within the I-COMET team.
Funding: This work was implemented with CEPT infrastructure financed by the European Union-the European
Regional Development Fund within the Operational Program “Innovative economy” for 2007–2013.
Acknowledgments: In this section you can acknowledge any support given which is not covered by the author
contribution or funding sections. This may include administrative and technical support, or donations in kind
(e.g., materials used for experiments).
Conflicts of Interest: Authors declare no COI related to this work.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

Zhu, N.; Zhang, D.; Wang, W.; Li, X.; Yang, B.; Song, J.; Zhao, X.; Huang, B.; Shi, W.; Lu, R.; et al. A Novel Coronavirus
from Patients with Pneumonia in China, 2019. New England Journal of Medicine 2020, 382, 727–733.
Wu, C.; Chen, X.; Cai, Y.; Xia, J. ’an; Zhou, X.; Xu, S.; Huang, H.; Zhang, L.; Zhou, X.; Du, C.; et al. Risk Factors
Associated With Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome and Death in Patients With Coronavirus Disease 2019
Pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA Intern. Med. 2020, doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.0994.
Yang, J.; Zheng, Y.; Gou, X.; Pu, K.; Chen, Z.; Guo, Q.; Ji, R.; Wang, H.; Wang, Y.; Zhou, Y. Prevalence of comorbidities
and its effects in coronavirus disease 2019 patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis. International Journal of
Infectious Diseases 2020, 94, 91–95.
Li, B.; Yang, J.; Zhao, F.; Zhi, L.; Wang, X.; Liu, L.; Bi, Z.; Zhao, Y. Prevalence and impact of cardiovascular metabolic
diseases on COVID-19 in China. Clinical Research in Cardiology 2020, 109, 531–538.
Leung, G.M.; Hedley, A.J.; Ho, L.-M.; Chau, P.; Wong, I.O.L.; Thach, T.Q.; Ghani, A.C.; Donnelly, C.A.; Fraser, C.; Riley,
S.; et al. The Epidemiology of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome in the 2003 Hong Kong Epidemic: An Analysis of All
1755 Patients. Annals of Internal Medicine 2004, 141, 662.
Assiri, A.; Al-Tawfiq, J.A.; Al-Rabeeah, A.A.; Al-Rabiah, F.A.; Al-Hajjar, S.; Al-Barrak, A.; Flemban, H.; Al-Nassir, W.N.;
Balkhy, H.H.; Al-Hakeem, R.F.; et al. Epidemiological, demographic, and clinical characteristics of 47 cases of Middle
East respiratory syndrome coronavirus disease from Saudi Arabia: a descriptive study. Lancet Infect. Dis. 2013, 13, 752–
761, doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(13)70204-4.
Madjid, M.; Safavi-Naeini, P.; Solomon, S.D.; Vardeny, O. Potential Effects of Coronaviruses on the Cardiovascular
System. JAMA Cardiology 2020, 5, 831.
Wang, K.; Gheblawi, M.; Oudit, G.Y. Angiotensin Converting Enzyme 2: A Double-Edged Sword. Circulation 2020.
Gheblawi, M.; Wang, K.; Viveiros, A.; Nguyen, Q.; Zhong, J.-C.; Turner, A.J.; Raizada, M.K.; Grant, M.B.; Oudit, G.Y.
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2: SARS-CoV-2 Receptor and Regulator of the Renin-Angiotensin System. Circulation
Research 2020, 126, 1456–1474.
Gheblawi, M.; Wang, K.; Viveiros, A.; Nguyen, Q.; Zhong, J.-C.; Turner, A.J.; Raizada, M.K.; Grant, M.B.; Oudit, G.Y.
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2: SARS-CoV-2 Receptor and Regulator of the Renin-Angiotensin System. Circulation
Research 2020, 126, 1456–1474.
Patel, V.B.; Zhong, J.-C.; Grant, M.B.; Oudit, G.Y. Role of the ACE2/Angiotensin 1–7 Axis of the Renin–Angiotensin
System in Heart Failure. Circulation Research 2016, 118, 1313–1326.
Hoffmann, M.; Kleine-Weber, H.; Krüger, N.; Müller, M.; Drosten, C.; Pöhlmann, S. The novel coronavirus 2019
(2019-nCoV) uses the SARS-coronavirus receptor ACE2 and the cellular protease TMPRSS2 for entry into target cells.
Sharma, A.; Garcia, G.; Jr; Wang, Y.; Plummer, J.T.; Morizono, K.; Arumugaswami, V.; Svendsen, C.N. Human
iPSC-Derived Cardiomyocytes Are Susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 Infection. Cell Reports. Medicine 2020, 1, 100052,
doi:10.1016/j.xcrm.2020.100052.
Bojkova, D.; Wagner, J.U.G.; Shumliakivska, M.; Aslan, G.S.; Saleem, U.; Hansen, A.; Luxán, G.; Günther, S.; Pham,
M.D.; Krishnan, J.; et al. SARS-CoV-2 infects and induces cytotoxic effects in human cardiomyocytes 2020,
2020.06.01.127605.
Pietro Bulfamante, G.; Perrucci, G.L.; Falleni, M.; Sommariva, E.; Tosi, D.; Martinelli, C.; Songia, P.; Poggio, P.; Carugo,
S.; Pompilio, G. Evidence of SARS-CoV-2 transcriptional activity in cardiomyocytes of COVID-19 patients without
clinical signs of cardiac involvement. medRxiv 2020, 2020.08.24.20170175, doi:10.1101/2020.08.24.20170175.
Oudit, G.Y.; Kassiri, Z.; Jiang, C.; Liu, P.P.; Poutanen, S.M.; Penninger, J.M.; Butany, J. SARS-coronavirus modulation of
myocardial ACE2 expression and inflammation in patients with SARS. Eur. J. Clin. Invest. 2009, 39, 618–625,
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2362.2009.02153.x.
Shi, S.; Qin, M.; Shen, B.; Cai, Y.; Liu, T.; Yang, F.; Gong, W.; Liu, X.; Liang, J.; Zhao, Q.; et al. Association of Cardiac
Injury With Mortality in Hospitalized Patients With COVID-19 in Wuhan, China. JAMA Cardiol 2020,
doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2020.0950.
Clerkin, K.J.; Fried, J.A.; Raikhelkar, J.; Sayer, G.; Griffin, J.M.; Masoumi, A.; Jain, S.S.; Burkhoff, D.; Kumaraiah, D.;
Rabbani, L.; et al. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) and Cardiovascular Disease. Circulation 2020,
doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.046941.
Guo, T.; Fan, Y.; Chen, M.; Wu, X.; Zhang, L.; He, T.; Wang, H.; Wan, J.; Wang, X.; Lu, Z. Cardiovascular Implications of
Fatal Outcomes of Patients With Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). JAMA Cardiol 2020,
doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2020.1017.
Kanehisa, M. The KEGG Database. “In Silico” Simulation of Biological Processes 91–103.
Doncheva, N.T.; Morris, J.H.; Gorodkin, J.; Jensen, L.J. Cytoscape StringApp: Network Analysis and Visualization of
Proteomics Data. J. Proteome Res. 2019, 18, 623–632, doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00702.
Zhang, H.; Penninger, J.M.; Li, Y.; Zhong, N.; Slutsky, A.S. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) as a SARS-CoV-2
receptor: molecular mechanisms and potential therapeutic target. Intensive Care Medicine 2020, 46, 586–590.
Chen, I.-Y.; Chang, S.C.; Wu, H.-Y.; Yu, T.-C.; Wei, W.-C.; Lin, S.; Chien, C.-L.; Chang, M.-F. Upregulation of the
Chemokine (C-C Motif) Ligand 2 via a Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Spike-ACE2 Signalling
Pathway. J. Virol. 2010, 84, 7703–7712, doi:10.1128/JVI.02560-09.
pubmeddev; Kuan TC, E. al Identifying the regulatory element for human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2)
expression
in
human
cardiofibroblasts.
PubMed
NCBI
Available
online:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21864606 (accessed on Apr 22, 2020).
Wicik, Z.; Jales Neto, L.H.; Guzman, L.E.; Pavão, R.; Takayama, L.; Caparbo, V.; Lopes, N.; Pereira, A.C.; Pereira, R.M.R.
The crosstalk between bone metabolism, lncRNAs, microRNAs and mRNAs in coronary artery calcification. Genomics
2020, doi:10.1016/j.ygeno.2020.09.041.
Palasca, O.; Santos, A.; Stolte, C.; Gorodkin, J.; Jensen, L.J. TISSUES 2.0: an integrative web resource on mammalian
tissue expression. Database 2018, 2018, doi:10.1093/database/bay003.
Shannon, P.; Markiel, A.; Ozier, O.; Baliga, N.S.; Wang, J.T.; Ramage, D.; Amin, N.; Schwikowski, B.; Ideker, T.
Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res. 2003, 13,
2498–2504, doi:10.1101/gr.1239303.
Simões, S.N.; Martins, D.C.; Pereira, C.A.B.; Hashimoto, R.F.; Brentani, H. NERI: network-medicine based integrative
approach for disease gene prioritization by relative importance. BMC Bioinformatics 2015, 16, 1–14,
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-16-S19-S9.
Eyileten, C.; Wicik, Z.; De Rosa, S.; Mirowska-Guzel, D.; Soplinska, A.; Indolfi, C.; Jastrzebska-Kurkowska, I.;
Czlonkowska, A.; Postula, M. MicroRNAs as Diagnostic and Prognostic Biomarkers in Ischemic Stroke—A
Comprehensive Review and Bioinformatic Analysis. Cells 2018, 7, 249.
Rani, J.; Mittal, I.; Pramanik, A.; Singh, N.; Dube, N.; Sharma, S.; Puniya, B.L.; Raghunandanan, M.V.; Mobeen, A.;
Ramachandran, S. T2DiACoD: A Gene Atlas of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus Associated Complex Disorders. Sci. Rep. 2017,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.

50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.

7, doi:10.1038/s41598-017-07238-0.
Huang, D.W.; Sherman, B.T.; Lempicki, R.A. Bioinformatics enrichment tools: paths toward the comprehensive
functional analysis of large gene lists. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009, 37, 1–13, doi:10.1093/nar/gkn923.
Chen, E.Y.; Tan, C.M.; Kou, Y.; Duan, Q.; Wang, Z.; Meirelles, G.; Clark, N.R.; Ma’ayan, A. Enrichr: interactive and
collaborative HTML5 gene list enrichment analysis tool. BMC Bioinformatics 2013, 14, 128.
Ru, Y.; Kechris, K.J.; Tabakoff, B.; Hoffman, P.; Radcliffe, R.A.; Bowler, R.; Mahaffey, S.; Rossi, S.; Calin, G.A.; Bemis, L.;
et al. The multiMiR R package and database: integration of microRNA–target interactions along with their disease and
drug associations. Nucleic Acids Research 2014, 42, e133–e133.
Pordzik, J.; Jakubik, D.; Jarosz-Popek, J.; Wicik, Z.; Eyileten, C.; De Rosa, S.; Indolfi, C.; Siller-Matula, J.M.; Czajka, P.;
Postula, M. Significance of circulating microRNAs in diabetes mellitus type 2 and platelet reactivity: bioinformatic
analysis and review. Cardiovascular Diabetology 2019, 18.
Sabatino, J.; Wicik, Z.; De Rosa, S.; Eyileten, C.; Jakubik, D.; Spaccarotella, C.; Mongiardo, A.; Postula, M.; Indolfi, C.
MicroRNAs fingerprint of bicuspid aortic valve. J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 2019, 134, 98–106, doi:10.1016/j.yjmcc.2019.07.001.
Barabási, A.-L.; Gulbahce, N.; Loscalzo, J. Network medicine: a network-based approach to human disease. Nature
Reviews Genetics 2011, 12, 56–68.
Eley, B. Faculty Opinions recommendation of Neurological associations of COVID-19. Faculty Opinions –
Post-Publication Peer Review of the Biomedical Literature 2020.
Feltrin, A.S.; Tahira, A.C.; Simões, S.N.; Brentani, H.; Martins, D.C., Jr Assessment of complementarity of WGCNA and
NERI results for identification of modules associated to schizophrenia spectrum disorders. PLoS One 2019, 14, e0210431,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0210431.
Guzzi, P.H.; Mercatelli, D.; Ceraolo, C.; Giorgi, F.M. Master Regulator Analysis of the SARS-CoV-2/Human
Interactome. J. Clin. Med. Res. 2020, 9, doi:10.3390/jcm9040982.
Garvin, M.R.; Alvarez, C.; Miller, J.I.; Prates, E.T.; Walker, A.M.; Amos, B.K.; Mast, A.E.; Justice, A.; Aronow, B.;
Jacobson, D. A mechanistic model and therapeutic interventions for COVID-19 involving a RAS-mediated bradykinin
storm. Elife 2020, 9, doi:10.7554/eLife.59177.
Ehrenfeld, M.; Tincani, A.; Andreoli, L.; Cattalini, M.; Greenbaum, A.; Kanduc, D.; Alijotas-Reig, J.; Zinserling, V.;
Semenova, N.; Amital, H.; et al. Covid-19 and autoimmunity. Autoimmunity Reviews 2020, 19, 102597.
Yan, J.; Risacher, S.L.; Shen, L.; Saykin, A.J. Network approaches to systems biology analysis of complex disease:
integrative methods for multi-omics data. Brief. Bioinform. 2018, 19, 1370–1381, doi:10.1093/bib/bbx066.
Kim, Y.-A.; Wuchty, S.; Przytycka, T.M. Identifying Causal Genes and Dysregulated Pathways in Complex Diseases.
PLoS Computational Biology 2011, 7, e1001095.
Suratanee, A.; Plaimas, K. Network-based association analysis to infer new disease-gene relationships using large-scale
protein interactions. PLOS ONE 2018, 13, e0199435.
Sadegh, S.; Matschinske, J.; Blumenthal, D.B.; Galindez, G.; Kacprowski, T.; List, M.; Nasirigerdeh, R.; Oubounyt, M.;
Pichlmair, A.; Rose, T.D.; et al. Exploring the SARS-CoV-2 virus-host-drug interactome for drug repurposing. Nat.
Commun. 2020, 11, 3518, doi:10.1038/s41467-020-17189-2.
Maroli, N.; Bhasuran, B.; Natarajan, J.; Kolandaivel, P. The potential role of procyanidin as a therapeutic agent against
SARS-CoV-2: a text mining, molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulation approach. J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn.
2020, 1–16, doi:10.1080/07391102.2020.1823887.
Muthuramalingam, P.; Jeyasri, R.; Valliammai, A.; Selvaraj, A.; Karthika, C.; Gowrishankar, S.; Pandian, S.K.; Ramesh,
M.; Chen, J.-T. Global multi-omics and systems pharmacological strategy unravel the multi-targeted therapeutic
potential of natural bioactive molecules against COVID-19: An in silico approach. Genomics 2020, 112, 4486–4504.
Zheng, Y.-Y.; Ma, Y.-T.; Zhang, J.-Y.; Xie, X. COVID-19 and the cardiovascular system. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 2020, 17, 259–
260, doi:10.1038/s41569-020-0360-5.
Liu, X.; Chen, Y.; Tang, W.; Zhang, L.; Chen, W.; Yan, Z.; Yuan, P.; Yang, M.; Kong, S.; Yan, L.; et al. Single-cell
transcriptome analysis of the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) associated gene ACE2 expression in normal and
non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) human male testes. Sci. China Life Sci. 2020, 63, 1006–1015,
doi:10.1007/s11427-020-1705-0.
Ding, Y.; He, L.; Zhang, Q.; Huang, Z.; Che, X.; Hou, J.; Wang, H.; Shen, H.; Qiu, L.; Li, Z.; et al. Organ distribution of
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV) in SARS patients: implications for
pathogenesis and virus transmission pathways. J. Pathol. 2004, 203, 622–630, doi:10.1002/path.1560.
Reis, F.M.; Bouissou, D.R.; Pereira, V.M.; Camargos, A.F.; dos Reis, A.M.; Santos, R.A. Angiotensin-(1-7), its receptor
Mas, and the angiotensin-converting enzyme type 2 are expressed in the human ovary. Fertility and Sterility 2011, 95,
176–181.
Somasundaram, N.P.; Ranathunga, I.; Ratnasamy, V.; Wijewickrama, P.S.A.; Dissanayake, H.A.; Yogendranathan, N.;
Gamage, K.K.K.; de Silva, N.L.; Sumanatilleke, M.; Katulanda, P.; et al. The Impact of SARS-Cov-2 Virus Infection on
the Endocrine System. J Endocr Soc 2020, 4, bvaa082, doi:10.1210/jendso/bvaa082.
Ma, L.; Xie, W.; Li, D.; Shi, L.; Mao, Y.; Xiong, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, M. Effect of SARS-CoV-2 infection upon male
gonadal function: A single center-based study. medRxiv 2020, 2020.03.21.20037267, doi:10.1101/2020.03.21.20037267.
Fan, C.; Li, K.; Ding, Y.; Lu, W.L.; Wang, J. ACE2 Expression in Kidney and Testis May Cause Kidney and Testis
Damage After 2019-nCoV Infection. Urology 2020.
Kaplan, S.A. Re: Urinary Frequency as a Possibly Overlooked Symptom in COVID-19 Patients: Does SARS-CoV-2
Cause Viral Cystitis? J. Urol. 2020, 101097JU000000000000124602, doi:10.1097/JU.0000000000001246.02.
Sun, J.; Zhu, A.; Li, H.; Zheng, K.; Zhuang, Z.; Chen, Z.; Shi, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Chen, S.-B.; Liu, X.; et al. Isolation of
infectious SARS-CoV-2 from urine of a COVID-19 patient. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 2020, 9, 991–993,
doi:10.1080/22221751.2020.1760144.
Mak, T.W.; Hauck, L.; Grothe, D.; Billia, F. p53 regulates the cardiac transcriptome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2017,
114, 2331–2336, doi:10.1073/pnas.1621436114.
Rhaleb, N.-E.; Yang, X.-P.; Carretero, O.A. The kallikrein-kinin system as a regulator of cardiovascular and renal
function. Compr. Physiol. 2011, 1, 971–993, doi:10.1002/cphy.c100053.
Isordia-Salas, I.; Pixley, R.A.; Sáinz, I.M.; Martínez-Murillo, C.; Colman, R.W. The role of plasma high molecular weight
kininogen in experimental intestinal and systemic inflammation. Arch. Med. Res. 2004, 35, 369–377,
doi:10.1016/j.arcmed.2004.05.004.
Mattsson, E.; Herwald, H.; Cramer, H.; Persson, K.; Sjöbring, U.; Björck, L. Staphylococcus aureus induces release of
bradykinin in human plasma. Infect. Immun. 2001, 69, 3877–3882, doi:10.1128/IAI.69.6.3877-3882.2001.
Schreier, B.; Rabe, S.; Schneider, B.; Bretschneider, M.; Rupp, S.; Ruhs, S.; Neumann, J.; Rueckschloss, U.; Sibilia, M.;
Gotthardt, M.; et al. Loss of epidermal growth factor receptor in vascular smooth muscle cells and cardiomyocytes
causes
arterial
hypotension
and
cardiac
hypertrophy.
Hypertension
2013,
61,
333–340,
doi:10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.112.196543.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.

76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.

Mitchell, H.D.; Eisfeld, A.J.; Stratton, K.G.; Heller, N.C.; Bramer, L.M.; Wen, J.; McDermott, J.E.; Gralinski, L.E.; Sims,
A.C.; Le, M.Q.; et al. The Role of EGFR in Influenza Pathogenicity: Multiple Network-Based Approaches to Identify a
Key Regulator of Non-lethal Infections. Front Cell Dev Biol 2019, 7, 200, doi:10.3389/fcell.2019.00200.
Eimer, W.A.; Vijaya Kumar, D.K.; Navalpur Shanmugam, N.K.; Rodriguez, A.S.; Mitchell, T.; Washicosky, K.J.; György,
B.; Breakefield, X.O.; Tanzi, R.E.; Moir, R.D. Alzheimer’s Disease-Associated β-Amyloid Is Rapidly Seeded by
Herpesviridae to Protect against Brain Infection. Neuron 2018, 99, 56–63.e3, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2018.06.030.
Inyushin, M.; Zayas-Santiago, A.; Rojas, L.; Kucheryavykh, Y.; Kucheryavykh, L. Platelet-generated amyloid beta
peptides in Alzheimer’s disease and glaucoma. Histol. Histopathol. 2019, 34, 843–856, doi:10.14670/HH-18-111.
Kucheryavykh, L.Y.; Kucheryavykh, Y.V.; Washington, A.V.; Inyushin, M.Y. Amyloid Beta Peptide Is Released during
Thrombosis in the Skin. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, doi:10.3390/ijms19061705.
Chattopadhyay, S.; Basak, T.; Nayak, M.K.; Bhardwaj, G.; Mukherjee, A.; Bhowmick, R.; Sengupta, S.; Chakrabarti, O.;
Chatterjee, N.S.; Chawla-Sarkar, M. Identification of cellular calcium binding protein calmodulin as a regulator of
rotavirus A infection during comparative proteomic study. PLoS One 2013, 8, e56655, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0056655.
Lambert, D.W.; Clarke, N.E.; Hooper, N.M.; Turner, A.J. Calmodulin interacts with angiotensin-converting enzyme-2
(ACE2) and inhibits shedding of its ectodomain. FEBS Lett. 2008, 582, 385–390, doi:10.1016/j.febslet.2007.11.085.
Montezano, A.C.; Cat, A.N.D.; Rios, F.J.; Touyz, R.M. Angiotensin II and Vascular Injury. Current Hypertension Reports
2014, 16.
Crackower, M.A.; Sarao, R.; Oudit, G.Y.; Yagil, C.; Kozieradzki, I.; Scanga, S.E.; Oliveira-dos-Santos, A.J.; da Costa, J.;
Zhang, L.; Pei, Y.; et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 is an essential regulator of heart function. Nature 2002, 417,
822–828, doi:10.1038/nature00786.
Zou, M.-X.; Liu, H.-Y.; Haraguchi, Y.; Soda, Y.; Tatemoto, K.; Hoshino, H. Apelin peptides block the entry of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). FEBS Letters 2000, 473, 15–18.
Pagliaro, P.; Penna, C. ACE/ACE2 Ratio: A Key Also in 2019 Coronavirus Disease (Covid-19)? Front. Med. 2020, 7, 335,
doi:10.3389/fmed.2020.00335.
Wang, H.; Yang, P.; Liu, K.; Guo, F.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, G.; Jiang, C. SARS coronavirus entry into host cells through a
novel clathrin- and caveolae-independent endocytic pathway. Cell Res. 2008, 18, 290–301, doi:10.1038/cr.2008.15.
Szczepanski, A.; Owczarek, K.; Milewska, A.; Baster, Z.; Rajfur, Z.; Mitchell, J.A.; Pyrc, K. Canine respiratory
coronavirus employs caveolin-1-mediated pathway for internalization to HRT-18G cells. Vet. Res. 2018, 49, 55,
doi:10.1186/s13567-018-0551-9.
Emanuel, W.; Kirstin, M.; Vedran, F.; Asija, D.; Theresa, G.L.; Roberto, A.; Filippos, K.; David, K.; Salah, A.; Christopher,
B.; et al. Bulk and single-cell gene expression profiling of SARS-CoV-2 infected human cell lines identifies molecular
targets for therapeutic intervention.
Foy, B.H.; Carlson, J.C.T.; Reinertsen, E.; Padros I Valls, R.; Pallares Lopez, R.; Palanques-Tost, E.; Mow, C.; Westover,
M.B.; Aguirre, A.D.; Higgins, J.M. Association of Red Blood Cell Distribution Width With Mortality Risk in
Hospitalized
Adults
With
SARS-CoV-2
Infection.
JAMA
Netw
Open
2020,
3,
e2022058,
doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.22058.
Qin, M.; Cao, Z.; Wen, J.; Yu, Q.; Liu, C.; Wang, F.; Zhang, J.; Yang, F.; Li, Y.; Fishbein, G.; et al. An Antioxidant Enzyme
Therapeutic for COVID-19. Adv. Mater. 2020, e2004901, doi:10.1002/adma.202004901.
Valiente-Alandi, I.; Potter, S.J.; Salvador, A.M.; Schafer, A.E.; Schips, T.; Carrillo-Salinas, F.; Gibson, A.M.; Nieman,
M.L.; Perkins, C.; Sargent, M.A.; et al. Inhibiting Fibronectin Attenuates Fibrosis and Improves Cardiac Function in a
Model of Heart Failure. Circulation 2018, 138, 1236–1252.
Torre, D.; Pugliese, A.; Ferrario, G.; Marietti, G.; Forno, B.; Zeroli, C. Interaction of human plasma fibronectin with viral
proteins of human immunodeficiency virus. FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol. 1994, 8, 127–131,
doi:10.1111/j.1574-695X.1994.tb00434.x.
Barchetta, I.; Cavallo, M.G.; Baroni, M.G. COVID-19 and diabetes: Is this association driven by the DPP4 receptor?
Potential clinical and therapeutic implications. Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice 2020, 163, 108165.
Li, K.; Wohlford-Lenane, C.L.; Channappanavar, R.; Park, J.-E.; Earnest, J.T.; Bair, T.B.; Bates, A.M.; Brogden, K.A.;
Flaherty, H.A.; Gallagher, T.; et al. Mouse-adapted MERS coronavirus causes lethal lung disease in human DPP4
knockin mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2017, 114, E3119–E3128, doi:10.1073/pnas.1619109114.
Fan, C.; Wu, X.; Liu, Q.; Li, Q.; Liu, S.; Lu, J.; Yang, Y.; Cao, Y.; Huang, W.; Liang, C.; et al. A Human DPP4-Knockin
Mouse’s Susceptibility to Infection by Authentic and Pseudotyped MERS-CoV. Viruses 2018, 10, 448.
Iacobellis, G. COVID-19 and diabetes: Can DPP4 inhibition play a role? Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract. 2020, 162, 108125,
doi:10.1016/j.diabres.2020.108125.
Rose, C.E.; Edward Rose, C.; Sung, S.-S.J.; Fu, S.M. Significant Involvement of CCL2 (MCP-1) in Inflammatory
Disorders of the Lung. Microcirculation 2003, 10, 273–288.
He, L.; Ding, Y.; Zhang, Q.; Che, X.; He, Y.; Shen, H.; Wang, H.; Li, Z.; Zhao, L.; Geng, J.; et al. Expression of elevated
levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines in SARS-CoV-infected ACE2+ cells in SARS patients: relation to the acute lung
injury and pathogenesis of SARS. J. Pathol. 2006, 210, 288–297, doi:10.1002/path.2067.
Huang, C.; Wang, Y.; Li, X.; Ren, L.; Zhao, J.; Hu, Y.; Zhang, L.; Fan, G.; Xu, J.; Gu, X.; et al. Clinical features of patients
infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. The Lancet 2020, 395, 497–506.
Zhang, L.; Sun, X.; Chen, S.; Yang, C.; Shi, B.; Zhou, L.; Zhao, J. Long noncoding RNA DANCR regulates -Smad 4 axis to
promote chondrogenic differentiation of human synovium-derived mesenchymal stem cells. Biosci. Rep. 2017, 37,
doi:10.1042/BSR20170347.
Su, Y.; Feng, W.; Shi, J.; Chen, L.; Huang, J.; Lin, T. circRIP2 accelerates bladder cancer progression via
miR-1305/Tgf-β2/smad3 pathway. Molecular Cancer 2020, 19.
Yang, X.; Letterio, J.J.; Lechleider, R.J.; Chen, L.; Hayman, R.; Gu, H.; Roberts, A.B.; Deng, C. Targeted disruption of
SMAD3 results in impaired mucosal immunity and diminished T cell responsiveness to TGF-beta. EMBO J. 1999, 18,
1280–1291, doi:10.1093/emboj/18.5.1280.
Mirzaei, H.; Faghihloo, E. Viruses as key modulators of the TGF-β pathway; a double-edged sword involved in cancer.
Reviews in Medical Virology 2018, 28, e1967.
Eulertaimor, G.; Heger, J. The complex pattern of SMAD signalling in the cardiovascular system☆. Cardiovascular
Research 2006, 69, 15–25.
Qiu, H.; Zhang, Y.; Zhao, Q.; Jiang, H.; Yan, J.; Liu, Y. Platelet miR-587 may be Used as a Potential Biomarker for
Diagnosis of Patients with Acute Coronary Syndrome. Clinical Laboratory 2020, 66.
Tang, C.-M.; Zhang, M.; Huang, L.; Hu, Z.-Q.; Zhu, J.-N.; Xiao, Z.; Zhang, Z.; Lin, Q.-X.; Zheng, X.-L.; -Yang, M.; et al.
CircRNA_000203 enhances the expression of fibrosis-associated genes by derepressing targets of miR-26b-5p, Col1a2
and CTGF, in cardiac fibroblasts. Scientific Reports 2017, 7.
Chen, X.; Zhou, L.; Peng, N.; Yu, H.; Li, M.; Cao, Z.; Lin, Y.; Wang, X.; Li, Q.; Wang, J.; et al. MicroRNA-302a suppresses
influenza A virus–stimulated interferon regulatory factor-5 expression and cytokine storm induction. Journal of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.094714; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.
100.
101.
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
111.

Biological Chemistry 2017, 292, 21291–21303.
Hamada-Tsutsumi, S.; Naito, Y.; Sato, S.; Takaoka, A.; Kawashima, K.; Isogawa, M.; Ochiya, T.; Tanaka, Y. The antiviral
effects of human microRNA miR-302c-3p against hepatitis B virus infection. Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics
2019, 49, 1060–1070.
Peng, N.; Yang, X.; Zhu, C.; Zhou, L.; Yu, H.; Li, M.; Lin, Y.; Wang, X.; Li, Q.; She, Y.; et al. MicroRNA-302 Cluster
Downregulates Enterovirus 71–Induced Innate Immune Response by Targeting KPNA2. The Journal of Immunology 2018,
201, 145–156.
Li, G.; Song, Y.; Li, Y.-D.; Jie, L.-J.; Wu, W.-Y.; Li, J.-Z.; Zhang, Q.; Wang, Y. Circulating miRNA-302 family members as
potential biomarkers for the diagnosis of acute heart failure. Biomarkers in Medicine 2018, 12, 871–880.
Braga, L.; Ali, H.; Secco, I.; Giacca, M. Non-coding RNA therapeutics for cardiac regeneration. Cardiovasc. Res. 2020,
doi:10.1093/cvr/cvaa071.
Wang, J.; Huang, R.; Xu, Q.; Zheng, G.; Qiu, G.; Ge, M.; Shu, Q.; Xu, J. Mesenchymal Stem Cell–Derived Extracellular
Vesicles Alleviate Acute Lung Injury Via Transfer of miR-27a-3p. Critical Care Medicine 2020, 1.
Zhao, X.-R.; Zhang, Z.; Gao, M.; Li, L.; Sun, P.-Y.; Xu, L.-N.; Qi, Y.; Yin, L.-H.; Peng, J.-Y. MicroRNA-27a-3p aggravates
renal ischemia/reperfusion injury by promoting oxidative stress via targeting growth factor receptor-bound protein 2.
Pharmacol. Res. 2020, 155, 104718, doi:10.1016/j.phrs.2020.104718.
Lv, X.; Yan, J.; Jiang, J.; Zhou, X.; Lu, Y.; Jiang, H. MicroRNA-27a-3p suppression of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-γ contributes to cognitive impairments resulting from sevoflurane treatment. Journal of Neurochemistry 2017,
143, 306–319.
Vegter, E.L.; Ovchinnikova, E.S.; van Veldhuisen, D.J.; Jaarsma, T.; Berezikov, E.; van der Meer, P.; Voors, A.A. Low
circulating microRNA levels in heart failure patients are associated with atherosclerotic disease and
cardiovascular-related rehospitalizations. Clinical Research in Cardiology 2017, 106, 598–609.
Ovchinnikova, E.S.; Schmitter, D.; Vegter, E.L.; ter Maaten, J.M.; Valente, M.A.E.; Liu, L.C.Y.; van der Harst, P.; Pinto,
Y.M.; de Boer, R.A.; Meyer, S.; et al. Signature of circulating microRNAs in patients with acute heart failure. European
Journal of Heart Failure 2016, 18, 414–423.
Yamada, K.; Takizawa, S.; Ohgaku, Y.; Asami, T.; Furuya, K.; Yamamoto, K.; Takahashi, F.; Hamajima, C.; Inaba, C.;
Endo, K.; et al. MicroRNA 16-5p is upregulated in calorie-restricted mice and modulates inflammatory cytokines of
macrophages. Gene 2020, 725, 144191, doi:10.1016/j.gene.2019.144191.
Ye, E.-A.; Liu, L.; Jiang, Y.; Jan, J.; Gaddipati, S.; Suvas, S.; Steinle, J.J. miR-15a/16 reduces retinal leukostasis through
decreased pro-inflammatory signalling. J. Neuroinflammation 2016, 13, 305, doi:10.1186/s12974-016-0771-8.
Mariconti, M.; Vola, A.; Manciulli, T.; Genco, F.; Lissandrin, R.; Meroni, V.; Rosenzvit, M.; Tamarozzi, F.; Brunetti, E.
Correction to: Role of microRNAs in host defense against Echinococcus granulosus infection: a preliminary assessment.
Immunol. Res. 2019, 67, 98, doi:10.1007/s12026-018-9060-1.
Biswas, S.; Haleyurgirisetty, M.; Lee, S.; Hewlett, I.; Devadas, K. Development and validation of plasma miRNA
biomarker signature panel for the detection of early HIV-1 infection. EBioMedicine 2019, 43, 307–316,
doi:10.1016/j.ebiom.2019.04.023.
Ketprasit, N.; Cheng, I.S.; Deutsch, F.; Tran, N.; Imwong, M.; Combes, V.; Palasuwan, D. The characterization of
extracellular vesicles-derived microRNAs in Thai malaria patients. Malar. J. 2020, 19, 285,
doi:10.1186/s12936-020-03360-z.
Jia, H.-L.; He, C.-H.; Wang, Z.-Y.; Xu, Y.-F.; Yin, G.-Q.; Mao, L.-J.; Liu, C.-W.; Deng, L. MicroRNA expression profile in
exosome discriminates extremely severe infections from mild infections for hand, foot and mouth disease. BMC Infect.
Dis. 2014, 14, 506, doi:10.1186/1471-2334-14-506.
Marquez-Pedroza, J.; Cárdenas-Bedoya, J.; Morán-Moguel, M.C.; Escoto-Delgadillo, M.; Torres-Mendoza, B.M.;
Pérez-Ríos, A.M.; González-Enriquez, G.V.; Vázquez-Valls, E. Plasma microRNA expression levels in HIV-1-positive
patients receiving antiretroviral therapy. Biosci. Rep. 2020, 40, doi:10.1042/BSR20194433.
Zhao, Y.; Yan, M.; Chen, C.; Gong, W.; Yin, Z.; Li, H.; Fan, J.; Zhang, X.A.; Wang, D.W.; Zuo, H. MiR-124 aggravates
failing hearts by suppressing CD151-facilitated angiogenesis in heart. Oncotarget 2018, 9, 14382–14396,
doi:10.18632/oncotarget.24205.
Dang, J.W.; Tiwari, S.K.; Qin, Y.; Rana, T.M. Genome-wide Integrative Analysis of Zika-Virus-Infected Neuronal Stem
Cells Reveals Roles for MicroRNAs in Cell Cycle and Stemness. Cell Rep. 2019, 27, 3618–3628.e5,
doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2019.05.059.

