bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Cardiorespiratory physiological perturbations after acute smoke-induced
lung injury and during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support in
sheep

Saul Chemonges1*
School of Veterinary Science, The University of Queensland, Gatton Campus,
Gatton, Qld 4343, Australia

*Corresponding author
E-mail: s_chemonges@yahoo.com (SC)

1
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Background: Numerous successful therapies developed for human medicine involve animal
experimentation. Animal studies that are focused solely on translational potential, may not
sufficiently document unexpected outcomes. Considerable amounts of data from such studies could
be used to advance veterinary science. For example, sheep are increasingly being used as models of
intensive care and therefore, data arising from such models must be published. In this study, the
hypothesis is that there is little information describing cardiorespiratory physiological data from
sheep models of intensive care and the author aimed to analyse such data to provide biological
information that is currently not available for sheep that received extracorporeal life support (ECLS)
following acute smoke-induced lung injury.
Methods: Nineteen mechanically ventilated adult ewes undergoing intensive care during evaluation
of a form of ECLS (treatment) for acute lung injury were used to collate clinical observations. Eight
sheep were injured by acute smoke inhalation prior to treatment (injured/treated), while another eight
were not injured but treated (uninjured/treated). Two sheep were injured but not treated
(injured/untreated), while one received room air instead of smoke as the injury and was not treated
(placebo/untreated). The data were then analysed for 11 physiological categories and compared
between the two treated groups.
Results: Compared with the baseline, treatment contributed to and exacerbated the deterioration of
pulmonary pathology by reducing lung compliance and the arterial oxygen partial pressure to
fractional inspired oxygen (PaO2/FiO2) ratio. The oxygen extraction index changes mirrored those of
the PaO2/FiO2 ratio. Decreasing coronary perfusion pressure predicted the severity of
cardiopulmonary injury.
Conclusions: These novel observations could help in understanding similar pathology such as that
which occurs in animal victims of smoke inhalation from house or bush fires, aspiration pneumonia
secondary to tick paralysis and in the management of the severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID19) in humans.
2
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
During multifaceted experiments involving intensive care in large animal models in
translational research, information related to animal monitoring is often collected with varying
accuracy, scope and end-user applications. Data collection can be manual, electronic, or both1-3.
Manually input data can include subjectively scored end points, like the plane of anaesthesia, and
objective data such as heart rate or breaths per minute. Depending on the goals of the study, certain
information may be used to validate or test novel therapies, or to understand and refine existing
treatments. In certain cases, experimental information may be collected for scientific curiosity or for
‘classified’ use, and outcomes may never be publicly available, particularly if the results are
negative.
The source of data for this study was from a sheep model2-5 in which sheep were treated for
acute smoke-induced acute lung injury using veno-venous (VV) extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation (ECMO) 2, a form of extracorporeal life support (ECLS) developed to complement the
treatment of acute lung injury in humans6-8. During this type of ECLS, venous blood is carried from
the patient to a gas exchange device where the blood is enriched with oxygen, has carbon dioxide is
removed, and oxygenated blood is returned to the patient’s circulation in the right atrium. This
method can be used for treatment, as respiratory support during lung transplantation, and in critically
ill patients with potentially reversible respiratory failure8,9. The multiple advanced cardiovascular3,
respiratory, patient point-of-care procedures and instrumentation associated with ECLS even in
animal experimentation is highly data- and equipment-intensive. This platform is useful for
developing research and methodological skills for in vivo animal instrumentation and for the
processing of large, real-time clinical data sets from multifaceted animal studies that can be applied
to similar intensive care scenarios. An opportunity to develop these skills arose within a source study
conducted at Queensland University of Technology and The University of Queensland, which was an
ongoing publicly funded animal experimentation study. While the objectives of the primary study
had a separate focus, there were considerable amounts of redundant raw data with potential use in
3
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

veterinary science and other disciplines, once processed.
Although burn and smoke inhalation ECLS models in sheep have been around for many
years, most studies have only focused on their translational potential for applications in human
medicine and not for veterinary science applications or further refinement of the model. For example,
it has been documented that prolonged exposure to smoke exacerbates lung injury after evaluating
the manner various types of exposure to smoke chemicals cause injury10. Another sheep ECMO
study investigated the pathophysiology of circulating leukocytes, oxygen free-radical activity,
thromboxane release and respiration11. In the preceding study, animals treated with smoke injury
followed by ECMO had significantly increased circulating thromboxane B2 levels and oxygen freeradical activity compared with controls and animals treated with smoke and mechanical ventilation
but details of haemodynamics were not presented.
In the present study, the author hypothesised that there is little information describing
physiological data from multifaceted sheep models of intensive care and the author aimed to analyse
such data to provide cardiorespiratory biological information that is not currently available in
sufficient detail for sheep that receive ECLS following acute smoke-induced acute lung injury. The
overall goal was to provide useful information relevant to the sheep model itself as well as to those
interested in broad animal experimentation and veterinary medicine in general. The specific objective
was to utilise the raw data from the sheep ECMO model study and analyse that data to provide
biological information that is not currently available for sheep that receive ECLS following acute
smoke-induced lung injury to further understand the physiology of cardiorespiratory support.

Materials and methods
Ethics statement
Animals were obtained and treated in accordance with the Australian Code of Practice for the
Care and Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes12, with strict adherence to published and currently
4
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
13,14

acceptable guidelines on using experimental animals and reporting findings

. All studies were

registered with institutional animal welfare and ethics departments; moreover, the Queensland
University of Technology Animal Ethics Approval No. 110000053 was obtained and it was ratified
by The University of Queensland.

Experimental animals
Batches of approximately 2-year old healthy adult merino ewes (Ovis aries) were obtained
and carted to Brisbane from the Australian Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation (CSIRO) breeding facility in Armidale, New South Wales. The sheep were agisted as a
flock in an open pasture farm to be used as part of, and a continuation of previously described
studies15. The farm had improved pastures and the sheep had natural shade from trees with free
access to water before being transferred within two weeks of experiments to a purpose-built animal
experimental laboratory at QUT-MERF1,15. The sheep were handled as per standard humane
operating procedures that have been described in detail elsewhere1. The experiments were conducted
at the Biological Research Facility (BRF) housed within the Medical Engineering Research Facility
of Queensland University of Technology (QUT-MERF) in Brisbane. Animal selection and
experimental procedures for this, and also other multifaceted studies that used similar methods have
previously been described15-17. Briefly, the sheep were fed proprietary sheep pellets, lucerne and had
free access to water. Shelter was provided in built concrete-floored sheds in which the sheep had free
access. Shade was also provided by large trees in the paddocks and the sheep interacted freely with
each other. Animals were fasted for approximately 24 h with free access to drinking water until two
hours before the commencement of the experimental procedure at 8:00 – 9:00 a.m. on the day of the
experiment. Local guidelines mandated the presence of a team comprising of a veterinarian and other
trained personnel to monitor the sheep at all times for the duration of the experiment for animal
welfare purposes and for the mitigating staff fatigue. If at any time the animal became
physiologically distressed to such an extent that it could not be managed or reversed, mechanisms
were in place to have the sheep be immediately euthanased and documented accordingly 1.
5
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A sample size calculation was performed for the entire original sheep ECMO project which
comprised 72 sheep (9 groups of 8 sheep each), as previously reported1. There was a subsequent
addition of two control groups (two groups of eight sheep each), bring the total of sheep to 88. The
other experimental groups were out of scope, as they investigated other aspects of ECLS such as
blood transfusion studies, therefore, this study focuses on the cardiorespiratory physiology (4 groups)
only. In this study, 19 sheep were pseudo-randomised into four experimental groups (Table 1). The
experimental groups were classified based on the following two aspects: the duration of treatment
(24 hours of ECMO only—E24H); treatment after smoke inhalation (injury) (24 hours of ECMO
after smoke inhalation—SE24H). Two additional groups included one group that received smoke
inhalation injury but no treatment (24 hours of monitoring only after smoke inhalation and no
ECMO; SC24H), and another group that inhaled room air only as the injury (placebo) and no
treatment (24 hours of monitoring, no smoke inhalation and no ECMO; C24H). Robust data was
acquired from 16 sheep (E24H and SE24H) and included fully in the study; however, data of three
sheep from groups SC24H and C24H was considered only as early observational data – within the
timeline required to satisfy the requirements of a research degree at The University of Queensland
back then. A systematic approach was developed for processing the data. (All raw and processed data
can be downloaded at https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.3r2280gd5.)

Experimental procedures
Critical care of animals, VV ECMO setup and physiological data acquisition
The details of animal selection, care, and pre-anaesthetic processes; anaesthesia technique;
airway access and ventilation; instrumentation for VV ECMO;

haemodynamic monitoring;

respiratory monitoring; temperature, fluids, vasoactive drug administration, and electrolyte
management; blood collection; physiological data acquisition; and the technique for euthanasia of the
sheep after the experiments have previously been described in a detailed protocol1. In brief, the sheep
was restrained in a sling cage and the ventral neck region was aseptically prepared to enable
intravenous access. For VV ECMO implementation, venous blood was accessed from the right
jugular vein of the animal and then oxygenated and returned to the right atrium of the heart after it
6
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

was made to pass through an oxygenator. For the combined purpose of blood sampling,
administration of medications, and fluid administration, a multi-lumen central venous catheter was
inserted into the left jugular vein of the animal under local anaesthesia. The left jugular vein was also
cannulated with an 8G sheath for the insertion of a pulmonary artery catheter for haemodynamic
monitoring. In addition, an 11G sheath catheter was then inserted proximally into the left jugular
vein for intra-cardiac echocardiography catheter insertion. The right jugular vein was cannulated
both proximally and distally with single lumen central lines to aid insertion of return and access
ECMO cannulas, respectively. All animals were intubated and received mechanical ventilation as
previously described1. Briefly, the initial ventilator tidal volume was set to approximately 10 mL/kg
with a respiratory rate of 15 breaths/min, positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 5 cm H 2O, and
an initial FiO2 (fraction of inspired oxygen) of 1.0. These settings were then titrated based on arterial
blood gas results. A low tidal volume—high PEEP strategy was used to minimise ventilator-induced
lung injury.
In order to obtain high-quality cardiorespiratory monitoring data, the instrumentation of the
sheep was undertaken to acquire and derive the following physiological parameters using established
standard methods at defined timepoints: core body temperature (T), pO2, SpO2, alveolar–arterial
oxygen gradient P(A-a)O2, PaO2/FiO2 ratio, end-tidal carbon dioxide concentration (etCO2), heart
rate (HR), arterial blood pressure (BP) (systolic and diastolic), mean arterial BP (MAP), pulmonary
artery pressure (PA) (systolic and diastolic), mean pulmonary artery pressure (MPAP), central
venous pressure (CVP), pulmonary artery occlusion pressure (PAOP), mixed venous oxygen
saturation (SvO2), stroke volume (SV), continuous cardiac output (CCO), cardiac index (CI),
systemic vascular resistance (SV), systemic vascular resistance index (SVRI), pulmonary vascular
resistance index (PVRI), left ventricular stroke work index (LVSWI), right ventricular stroke work
index (RVSWI), coronary perfusion pressure (CPP), arterial oxygen content (CaO 2), and oxygen
delivery index (O2EI). (These methods are detailed in data files that can be downloaded at
https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.3r2280gd5.)

7
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Smoke inhalation injury
In the original study of the ECMO model4, sheep inhaled standardised cotton smoke
generated by a device that combusts material in an oxygen-deficient environment as previously
described18. In brief, 8 g of cotton towelling was combusted in a chamber with transparent walls and
400 ml tidal volume. One tidal volume breath (approximately 10–12 ml/kg) of the smoke was
delivered to the sheep via plastic tubing that was 1 m long connected to a tracheostomy tube. A fixed
number (12) of breaths were given with each load of cotton over a period of approximately one
minute. Serial arterial blood gas samples were taken to assess the effect of smoke inhalation,
beginning at a predetermined time point after the smoke breath cycles.

Physiological data management
Raw data were obtained from critical care monitoring of sheep undergoing treatment for
acute smoke-induced lung injury that involved several separate previous projects. Data analysed
were collected prior to 23 August 2013 and were kindly obtained from two of the scientists (Diab, S.
and Dunster, K.R., who developed the base model – see reference4), as part of a research higherdegree project of the author at The University of Queensland19,20. All data files were stored in
Microsoft® Excel 97–2003 (Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, USA) format and were grouped
per sheep and date of the experiment. Data comprised separate files of real-time physiological data
recorded in the hard drives of the monitoring devices (electronically acquired data) and parameters
manually recorded by those monitoring the sheep under anaesthesia (manually acquired data)—
which included data from the electronic monitoring equipment—as back-up if the electronic
monitors malfunctioned.

Manually acquired physiological data workflow
A clone of the master manual data entry Excel spreadsheet was created by excluding the
formatting and formulas. Several members of the sheep ECMO research team repeatedly inspected
8
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the data for errors to in order to ensure that all columns, rows, time points, and data points had been
copied correctly, including number formats. Redundant columns were omitted from the spreadsheet
and data were curated and aligned to predetermined experimental time points. While maintaining the
same experimental time point headers on the spreadsheet, data were grouped into the following
categories: ventilator settings, blood pressure and haemodynamics, fluids and urine output, arterial
blood gas values, activated clotting time, anaesthetics, anticoagulants, and ECLS circuit
observations.

Electronically acquired physiological data workflow
Electronically acquired physiologic monitoring raw data were inspected for completeness.
The data comprised 36 time points: ECLS pump time (min); time of day (h); electrocardiograph
(heart rate); arterial blood pressure (mean, systolic, diastolic, heart rate); central venous pressure
(mean); pulmonary artery pressure (mean, systolic, diastolic); oxygenator pressure (pre- and post-);
capnography (etCO2, respiratory rate); pulse oximetry (SpO2, heart rate); ECLS pump (flow rate,
speed); ventilator (mode, frequency, oxygen, pressure control, inspiratory volume, expiratory
volume, expiratory minute volume, pressure maximum, mean pressure, positive end-expiratory
pressure, plateau pressure, inspiratory resistance, expiratory pressure, pulmonary compliance,
inspiratory flow); mixed venous oxygen saturation (SvO2); and continuous cardiac output (CCO). A
baseline time point was established after instrumentation and an injury time point corresponding to
the smoke inhalation time point was determined thereafter. It is important to note that there may or
may not have been any data at any given point in time. The electronically acquired physiological
monitoring data were inspected for errors and cleaned to provide data for downstream analysis.

Respiratory efficiency and haemodynamic monitoring
Manually acquired observations at specifically designated timepoints were recorded and
extracted as detailed in the data filed at doi:10.5061/dryad.3r2280gd5. These timepoints were at
9
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

baseline (soon after instrumentation of the sheep), smoke injury, 5 min post smoke injury, 1 hour
post smoke injury. This was then followed by ECMO treatment, which was recorded in the following
manner: 0, 0.25, 1, 1.5, 2, 4, 6, 6.5, 7, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22 and 24 hours of ECMO.

Pre-data analysis checks
Thereafter, data were subjected to further integrity checks. An important step was to make a
plot of data versus time together with descriptive statistics for all data points in the grouped data.
After artefact elimination and integrity checks, data for individual sheep were assigned to six
categories: activated clotting time; anaesthetics + inotropes and anticoagulants; arterial blood gas
values; blood pressure + ventilation and haemodynamic data; calculated respiratory + haemodynamic
variables; and fluids and urine production. Using specially written macros, data were extracted from
each experiment and grouped by parameters corresponding to experimental time points. All sheep
treatment data were then filed according to parameter.
Data from the 19 sheep from groups E24H, SE24H, C24H and SC24H were processed
further. Data integrity checks were performed again and repeated by several sheep ECMO research
team members. The treatment timeline comprised 22 time points for all experiments in which sheep
received acute smoke-induced lung injury (SE24H). A trend plot and descriptive statistics panel in
Excel were used for data quality control processes for suitability for downstream data analysis and
end-user applications.

Statistical methods
In order to meet the specific objective of the study, data from the groups, uninjured/treated
and injured/treated groups were analysed after testing for normality using D’Agostino–Pearson
omnibus normality test. The means, medians and standard deviations of the weights of the sheep,
where applicable, were tabulated and graphically compared. The physiological parameters of the
groups were charted and compared with each other using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA),
10
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

where appropriate and significance was reported based on Brown-Forsythe test. Further, parameters
between groups were compared using a paired two-tailed t-test. All p-values were two-sided and p <
0.05 was considered statistically significant. All statistical calculations were performed using
GraphPad PRISM 6 software (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA).
An earlier version of this article can be found on bioRxiv (doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511).

Results
The biodata of the sheep that were used in the current analysis are presented in the Methods
section (see Table 1). The weights of the uninjured/treated sheep, unlike the injured/treated group,
did not pass the D’Agostino–Pearson omnibus normality test; however, there was no significant
difference in the weights of the sheep between the groups (Figure 1).

Mechanical ventilation
A decrease in pulmonary compliance was found in all of the sheep during the course of the
experiments, with the injured/treated (SE24H) animals having the most severe and drastic decrease
followed by the uninjured/treated (E24H), injured/untreated (SC24), and placebo/untreated (C24)
sheep in that order (Figure 2). There was a significant difference (p = 0.0013) in pulmonary
compliance between uninjured/treated and injured/treated groups. The injured/treated sheep had
consistently lower SpO2 compared with the other groups, but there was no significant difference in
SpO2 readings between the groups (Figure 3). Further, there was an initial increase in etCO2 followed
by a rapid decrease that reduced 15 minutes after the treatment was began. The etCO2 of the injured
sheep continued to trend downward and plateaued in the uninjured groups (Figure 4). There was a
significant difference (p = 0.0147) in the etCO2 between the uninjured/treated and injured/treated
groups.

11
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Arterial blood gas evaluation
Blood pH varied between the groups (Figure 5). The placebo/untreated sheep had the highest pH
while the injured/treated group had the lowest. There was a significant difference in pH between the
uninjured/treated and injured/treated groups (p = 0.0343). The pCO2 in all but the uninjured/treated
sheep increased initially before plummeting sharply, thereby forming a shallow trough corresponding
to 1 hour after the treatment, followed by a slight increase before stabilising in all sheep (Figure 6).
There was a gradual decrease in pO2 in the treated groups of sheep from baseline before decreasing
dramatically at the start of treatment with the injured sheep having the most profound decrease
(Figure 7). However, there was no significant difference in pO2 between the uninjured/treated and
injured/treated groups.

Haemoglobin dynamics
The concentration of haemoglobin [Hb] was found to decrease slightly from baseline before
gradually increasing in the injured sheep and remained relatively constant over time in the uninjured
sheep. There was a significant difference in [Hb] between the uninjured/treated and injured/treated (p
= 0.0131) groups (Figure 8). The fraction of oxyhaemoglobin (FO2Hb) decreased sharply with the
lowest reading at five minutes post-injury before returning to near baseline levels within 1 hour of
the treatment (Figure 9). The injured/treated sheep had a considerably deeper trough in FO2Hb level
and there was a significant difference (p = 0.046) between troughs. There was no change in FO2Hb
for the uninjured sheep. Further, the fraction of carboxyhaemoglobin (FCOHb) increased sharply
from baseline, peaking at approximately five minutes post-injury and decreased sharply thereafter to
the beginning of treatment before gradually returning to near-baseline levels at approximately 6
hours after the treatment was begun in the injured sheep (Figure 10). The injured/treated sheep had a
higher peak FCOHb than the injured/untreated sheep, although the difference was not significant.
There was no change in FCOHb for the uninjured sheep. The fraction of methaemoglobin (MetHb)
increased gradually from baseline, peaking at approximately five minutes post-injury and then
gradually decreased when the treatment was begun (Figure 11). This was followed by a gradual
12
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

return to near-baseline levels at approximately 6 hours after the treatment was begun in the
injured/treated sheep. There was no change in MetHb for the uninjured sheep. There was an initial
subtle decrease in calculated haematocrit (Hct) before a steady increase in the injured sheep and
relatively flat slopes for the uninjured sheep (Figure 12).

Electrolytes
The blood sodium concentration [Na+] was relatively stable and there were no significant
differences between groups (Figure 13). There was an initial decrease in the blood calcium [Ca2+]
level, with the lowest point at approximately 1 hour after the treatment was begun, before it levelled
out thereafter in all groups (Figure 14). Further, there was a significant difference in [Ca2+] between
the uninjured/treated and the injured/treated groups (p = 0.0001). The placebo/untreated and
injured/treated groups maintained the highest and lowest levels of [Ca2+], respectively, throughout
the experiments. Blood chloride [Cl-] levels remained stable compared with baseline levels during
the initial stages and then increased gradually thereafter (Figure 15). The blood potassium
concentration [K+] initially decreased as compared with baseline levels, reaching a minimum
concentration 1 hour after the treatment was begun and then gradually increased with a peak at
approximately 12 hours after treatment was begun in all experimental groups (Figure 16). Although
the injured/untreated and injured/treated sheep had higher [K+] than the uninjured sheep, the
differences were not significant. Overall, the anion gap decreased gradually, achieving a relatively
gentle slope at approximately 6 hours after the treatment was begun and did not change significantly,
thereafter (Figure 17). There was a gradual decrease in anion gap from baseline in the course of the
experiments and there was no significant difference in anion gap between the uninjured/treated and
injured/treated groups.

Metabolites
Although there was an increase in blood glucose level [Glu] for the injured/treated sheep after
6 hours of treatment, the change was not significant. There was an initial decrease in lactate levels
13
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

[Lac] 6 hours after the treatment was begun, followed by a gradual increase for the injured sheep,
particularly for the injured/treated group. There was no significant difference in [Lac] between the
treated groups.

Acid-base balance
There was an increase in the blood base levels [Base (ecf)] that peaked 1 hour post-treatment,
followed by a gradual decrease in the untreated group. [Base (ecf)] in the treated groups remained at
baseline levels to 1 hour after the treatment begun, before decreasing markedly in the injured/treated
sheep (Figure 20). There was a significant difference (p = 0.0257) in base (ecf) between the
uninjured/treated and injured/treated groups. Further, blood bicarbonate concentrations [HCO3-]
increased initially in the untreated groups before decreasing gradually; however, levels remained
higher compared with the treated sheep (Figure 21).

Haemodynamics
There was a gradual decrease in heart rate (HR) of the sheep during the course of the
experiments, with the placebo/untreated groups maintaining a higher HR compared with the
injured/untreated, injured/treated, and uninjured/treated groups early in the experiments (Figure 22).
There was no significant difference in HR between the uninjured/treated and injured/treated groups.
The mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) decreased in the early stages of the experiments before
subsequently increasing gradually, peaking at approximately the time that the treatment begun before
gradually decreasing again in all but the placebo/untreated sheep (Figure 23). The injured/treated
groups had a consistently lower MAP compared with the other groups and there was a significant
difference in MAP (p = 0.0058) between the uninjured/treated and injured/treated groups. The mean
pulmonary artery pressure (MPAP) increased gradually, with the injured/treated group having a
consistently higher MPAP (Figure 24). There was no significant difference in MPAP between the
uninjured/treated and injured/treated groups. There was an initial, subtle increase in the central
venous pressure (CVP) that peaked at approximately 1 hour post-injury followed by a decrease that
14
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

stabilised at approximately 1 hour after the treatment was begun. Further, CVP levels in the
injured/treated and placebo/untreated sheep were consistently higher and lower, respectively, in the
course of the experiments.
Mixed venous oxygen saturation (SvO2) had a lower baseline before eventually rising to a
relatively stable and higher level for the treated sheep, and a slightly lower level for the untreated
sheep (Figure 26). The injured/untreated sheep maintained a consistently lower SvO2 compared with
the other groups. Except for the placebo/untreated group, there was a decrease in continuous cardiac
output (CCO) from baseline to approximately 1 hour after the treatment was begun (Figure 27).
There was a significant difference (p = 0.0009) in CCO between the uninjured/treated and
injured/treated groups with CCO in the treated groups increasing sharply before plateauing,
particularly in the uninjured/treated group. There was also a subsequent gradual decrease in CCO in
the injured/treated group. Stroke volume (SV) began to increase 1 hour after the treatment was begun
for all groups, except for the injured/untreated group in which levels remained relatively constant
(Figure 28). The SV in the injured/treated group began to decrease after 6 hours of treatment, while
SV in the uninjured/treated and placebo/untreated sheep increased steadily before decreasing or
levelling out after 12 hours or more of treatment. There were no significant differences in SV
between the injured/untreated and placebo/untreated. The stroke volume index (SVI) began to
increase 1 hour after the treatment was begun for all groups, except for the injured/untreated group,
for which SVI remained relatively constant (Figure 29). The SVI in the injured/treated group began
to decrease after 6 hours of treatment while SVI in the uninjured/treated and placebo/untreated
groups increased before subsequently decreasing or levelling out after 12 hours or more of treatment.
There were no significant differences in SVI between groups. While the cardiac index (CI) of the
uninjured/treated and placebo/untreated groups remained relatively close to baseline levels (Figure
30), the CI of the injured/treated and injured/untreated groups declined gradually over the course of
the experiments.
After an initial increase in systemic vascular resistance index (SVRI) approximately 1 hour
after treatment (Figure 31), SVRI began to decrease in all experimental groups before plateauing 12
15
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

hours after treatment, followed by a gentle increasing trend until the end of the experiments. The
SVRI in the injured/treated group was consistently below that of the other groups during treatment
while that of the injured/untreated group was correspondingly higher. There was no significant
difference in SVRI between the groups. The pulmonary vascular resistance index (PVRI) remained
close to baseline levels for all of the groups after 1 hour of treatment while that of the injured groups
progressively increased and that of the uninjured groups remained lower with a subtle decrease after
6 hours of treatment (Figure 32). The PVRI in the placebo/untreated sheep remained close to
baseline levels and the lowest throughout the course of the experiment. After a small peak attained at
the beginning of the treatment, the right ventricular stroke work index (RVSWI) in the uninjured
sheep gradually increased while that of the injured sheep decreased (Figure 33). There was a
significant difference (p = 0.0196) in the RVSWI gap between the uninjured/treated and
injured/treated groups. RVSWI in the placebo/untreated group remained high, while that of the
injured/treated group was consistently the lowest. The left ventricular stroke work index (LVSWI)
gradually increased in the uninjured/treated and placebo/untreated groups and plateaued 12 and 18
hours after treatment was begun, respectively, while LVSWI in the injured/untreated and
injured/treated groups of sheep decreased and plateaued at 12 hours after treatment was begun and
trended upward after 18 hours of treatment (Figure 34). LVSWI in the placebo/untreated group
remained consistently higher than in the other groups while that of the injured/treated group was
consistently the lowest.
Following a decrease in the coronary perfusion pressure (CPP) from baseline in the smokeinjured sheep, there was a subsequent increase in this parameter within 5 minutes prior to a sustained
decrease up to 18 hours of treatment, followed by another increase for the subsequent 6 hours (Figure
35). There was a significant difference in CPP (p = 0.0018) between the uninjured/treated and
injured/treated groups and CCP in the placebo/untreated sheep remained relatively stable after an
initial, subtle increase.
There was an initial subtle decrease in arterial oxygen content (CaO2) from baseline in all
groups before a sustained increase in the injured/untreated group, a steady level in the
16
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

placebo/untreated sheep, and a sharp trough in the injured/treated and uninjured/treated groups
(Figure 36). Following the trough, the CaO2 of the injured/treated group gradually returned to
baseline levels while that of the uninjured/treated group continued along a downward trend. There
was a significant difference (p < 0.0085) in CaO2 between the uninjured/treated and injured/treated
groups.
There was a slight decrease in the oxygen delivery index (DO2I) in all groups 1 hour after
treatment before a further marked decrease, except for the placebo/untreated sheep (Figure 37).
There was a significant difference (p = 0.0013) in DO2I between the uninjured/treated and
injured/treated groups. The injured/treated group had the lowest DO2I compared with the other
groups while the placebo/untreated sheep maintained the highest DO2I profile. The oxygen extraction
index (O2EI) decreased in all groups before plateauing after approximately 6 hours of treatment.
Further, there was a significant difference (p = 0.0247) in O2EI between the injured/treated and
uninjured/treated groups (Figure 38). The O2EI in the injured/treated and injured/untreated groups
was consistently lower and higher, respectively, compared with those of the other groups.

Fluid input and urine output
There was a variation in the volume of intravenous fluids administered to sheep in the
different experimental groups. The injured/treated sheep had the highest fluid requirements, while
the placebo/untreated sheep required the least (Figure 39). There was a significant difference (p <
0.0001) in fluid requirements between uninjured/treated and injured/treated sheep. The
injured/untreated and injured/treated groups produced the least and most urine on average,
respectively (Figure 40). There was no significant difference in urine output between the
uninjured/treated and injured/treated groups.

Anaesthetics
There was a significant difference (p < 0.0001) in the amount of alfaxalone required between
the uninjured/treated and injured/treated groups (Figure 41). The uninjured/treated group required
17
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

more alfaxalone on average and the injured/untreated group required the least amount on average.
Ketamine requirements differed between groups, with the injured/untreated group requiring the
highest amount on average and the injured/treated group requiring the least (Figure 42). There was
no significant difference in the quantities of ketamine required between the uninjured/treated and
injured/treated groups, but there were significant differences in midazolam requirements (Figure 43),
occurred between the uninjured/treated and injured/treated groups (p = 0.0067).

Anticoagulation
There were no significant differences in heparin infusion doses between the uninjured/treated
and injured/treated sheep. Heparin requirements for the placebo/untreated group were the lowest
(Figure 44). Activated clotting time increased sharply from baseline during pre-treatment and peaked
after 1 hour of treatment, before decreasing sharply and plateauing (Figure 45). There were no
significant differences in activated clotting time between groups.

ECLS circuit observations
There were significant differences in the ECLS pump speed (Figure 46), blood flow (Figure
47), and pressure differential (Figure 48) between the uninjured/treated and injured/treated groups.
Further pump speed, blood flow, and pressure differential were significantly different (p = 0.0022, p
= 0.0095 and p = 0.0041, respectively) between the two groups that received ECLS. These
parameters in the uninjured/treated group were consistently higher than those of the injured/treated
group.

Body temperature
Body temperature in the untreated groups gradually increased from baseline levels and
plateaued at approximately after 6 hours of treatment, and remained higher than that for the treated
groups (Figure 49). There was no significant difference in body temperature between the treated
18
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

groups.

Inflammatory cells and cytokines
Data were initially available in abstract form and subsequently as a full publication on inflammatory
cell infiltration into the lung tissue with a trend toward increased lung injury in sheep that inhaled
smoke, revealing damage to the bronchiolar lining and infiltration of inflammatory cells 5,21-23.

Discussion
The results of this study agree with and confirm earlier preliminary observations that ECLS
causes a decrease in pulmonary compliance (Figure 2) over time19. It was expected that the injured
sheep would have relatively lower SpO2 readings (Figure 3) compared with the other groups because
of episodes of hypotension with hypoxemia, which can affect pulse oximeter function24. The
relatively low etCO2 in the injured sheep suggested that the sheep may have hyperventilated (Figure
4), the causes of which were evaluated with respect to the reactive oxygen species or superoxide
dismutase activity by a team from the source study 25,26.
The relatively low blood pH in the injured/treated sheep as depicted in Figure 5, suggested
that the sheep tended to have metabolic acidosis, as the same group of animals also had low etCO2.
This also implies that there was no respiratory component that contributed to the observed acidosis.
The low pCO2 in the uninjured/treated sheep could be a result of hyperventilation and the high pCO2
in the injured/untreated sheep suggested that CO2 clearance was curtailed by injury (Figure 6).
The treatment of the sheep contributed to lung injury by causing deterioration of pO 2 (Figure
7). The low pO2 translated to a low partial arterial oxygen pressure/inspired oxygen proportion
(PaO2/FiO2 ratio), which was much worse in the injured sheep. This finding showed that ECLS
contributed to the deterioration of the PaO2/FiO2 ratio in the injured/treated group of sheep, a novel
finding that was also unexpected in the primary study (this has since been replicated in a more recent
study9). It could also be argued from the data that perhaps VV ECMO was performed in a suboptimal
19
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

manner, considering that the sheep oxygenation appeared to be less effective on ECMO than on the
ventilator alone, but this remains to be explored further in future.
Further, the relatively higher levels of [Hb] in the injured sheep suggested that these animals
could have been dehydrated as a secondary consequence of excessive fluid loss due to inflammation
and increased vascular permeability27, despite intravenous fluid replacement (Figure 8). However,
blood total protein and albumin levels, which are better predictors of dehydration in sheep28, were
not measured.
The inverse decrease in FO2Hb (Figure 9) relative to FCOHb (Figure 10) following smoke
injury was expected and is a finding that is in agreement with other studies27,29,30. It has recently been
demonstrated that FCOHb is not correlated to the extent of lung injury27. The gradual decrease in
MetHb (Figure 11) was probably caused by the enzymatic activity of methaemoglobin reductase 31
and the higher Hct observed in the injured sheep (Figure 12) could have been due to dehydration
because Hct was measured by an automated method.
As presented in Figure 14, the [Ca2+] was lower than the published normal level of 2.4
mmol/L

32

. Stress associated with yarding of the sheep and phosphorus imbalance in feed are the

most likely suggested causes of low [Ca2+]33. Fasting the sheep for 24 hours prior to the experimental
procedures could also have contributed to the relatively low [Ca2+].
The increase in Cl- beyond the normal range of 105–110 mmol/L32 during the experiments
(Figure 15) suggests that the sheep may have developed respiratory alkalosis. Hyperventilation or
metabolic acidosis resulting from sustained salivary loss of sodium bicarbonate that was more severe
in the injured/treated group may have played a role in hyperchloraemia, because Cl- is known to
replace HCO3- when the latter is lost from the body34,35. Baseline [K+] in all the sheep (Figure 16)
was below the published normal range of 4–5 mmol/L32 and this relative hypokalaemia may have
been related to low K+ in the diet36-38. The normal anion gap (Figure 17) with decreased HCO3(Figure 21) confirmed the presence of hyperchloraemic acidosis in all but the placebo/untreated
sheep. The cause of the hyperchloraemia was likely the prolonged administration of 0.9% NaCl.
Although normal [Glu] in ruminants is usually lower than that for other species, its relative
20
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

progressive increase in the injured sheep (Figure 18) may have been related to stress and severe pain
associated with injury or the development of enterotoxaemia39,40. The relative increase in [Lac]
beyond the reported normal range of 1–2 mmol/L in the injured sheep (Figure 19) suggested
dehydration, trauma, and sepsis41. In particular, sepsis is a concern related to the sub-optimal rumen
function, leading to loss of its buffer effect and an increase in the number of anaerobic bacteria with
prolonged hypomotility, such as that which occurs during long-duration anaesthesia. Therefore, the
increases in both [Glu] and [Lac] are consistent with severe injury.
The elevated Base (ecf) above +2 mmol/L for most of the first 12 hours in the
placebo/untreated and injured/untreated sheep suggested that the sheep were metabolically alkalotic
39

, before returning to normal levels (Figure 20). The relatively low Base (ecf) (less than −2 mmol/L)

was consistent with loss of HCO3- and the tendency of developing metabolic acidosis

39

in the

injured/treated sheep. The marked decrease in [HCO3-] in the injured sheep was consistent with
metabolic acidosis and was more severe in the injured/treated group, as illustrated in Figure 21,
thereby suggesting that ECLS was a contributing factor.
The resting HR of sheep is 50–80 beats/min32. In a study that instrumented conscious sheep,
the baseline heart rate was registered as 106 ± 9 beats/min42. In the present report, all of the sheep
had a relatively high HR, thereby suggesting that stress and pain were contributing factors (Figure
22). The gradual decrease in HR during the course of the experiments was consistent with the effects
of anaesthesia32.
In sheep, a mean arterial pressure below 60 mmHg indicates inadequate tissue perfusion32.
Although the MAP values in the injured sheep were lower than for the uninjured sheep (Figure 23),
MAP values were still within the published normal value of 70 mmHg32; the magnitude of injury was
again a predictor of how low the MAP was. Another predictor for the severity of the injury was the
mean pulmonary artery pressure, which was highest for the injured/treated sheep as illustrated in
Figure 24. The baseline values for MPAP were higher than the 17 ± 1 mmHg reported in another
study that used sheep for experiments42. The baseline CVP in all of the sheep in the present report
was > 10 mmHg (Figure 25), which was much higher than the 5.5 ± 1.2 mmHg reported elsewhere42
21
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

in instrumented conscious sheep and a novel finding in this study. Thus, in this study, the severity of
injury and treatment contributed to the CVP elevations found among the sheep.
There was a benefit of ECLS treatment for SvO2, as it remained high for both the
injured/treated and uninjured treated groups (Figure 26). The consistently low SvO2 in the
injured/untreated group was expected because of the slightly reduced cardiac output in this group;
however, this level of SvO2 was still higher than that reported in other studies42. Smoke injury was
associated with a sustained decrease in cardiac output in all the sheep that were exposed to smoke.
As in CCO changes (Figure 27), the SV (Figure 28), SVI (Figure 29) and CI (Figure 30) all had
similar profiles for different groups, with the injured sheep having lower values. The decrease in
SVRI in all of the sheep at a later stage in the experiments suggested that there was systemic
vasodilation (Figure 31). In contrast, the increase in PVRI in the injured sheep suggested that
vasoconstriction was caused by exposure to smoke injury (Figure 32). The exposure to smoke injury
worsened both RVSWI (Figure 33) and LVSWI (Figure 34) while there was an increase in both
parameters in the uninjured sheep. Reduced RVSWI is associated with poor functioning of the right
ventricle43,44 and LVSWI is a reliable parameter for left ventricular function45.
The reduction in coronary perfusion pressure in the injured/treated—and to a certain extent
the uninjured/ treated sheep—suggested that ECLS contributed to the decrease in CPP, in addition to
smoke injury (Figure 35). The CPP is an indicator of myocardial perfusion and has been proposed as
a drug target during resuscitation46. The observations in the present study support the suggestion that
CPP could be used to predict the severity of injury in sheep.
Further, the apparent increase in CaO2 in the injured sheep (Figure 36) could have been due
to the relative increase in [Hb] secondary to dehydration as illustrated in Figure 8. The low DO2I in
the injured/treated and uninjured/treated groups suggested that ECLS also contributed to this, in
addition to smoke, based on the relatively higher DO2I in the injured/untreated sheep (Figure 37).
Interestingly, the O2EI (Figure 38) had a comparable profile to that of the PaO2/FiO2 ratio and could
also be used to predict the contribution of ECLS to smoke-related injury.
The smoke-injured sheep required considerable amounts of intravenous fluids (Figure 39) to
22
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
27,29

compensate for the losses from pulmonary exudation and inflammation

. The mean urine

production in all groups (Figure 40) was marginally lower than the published normal of 1.2 mL/kg/h
32

but still considered to be within the acceptable range for this cohort of sheep. Moreover, the

dosage of anaesthetic drugs used was considered adequate for the experiments (Figures 41, 42 and
43). In addition, heparin infusion (Figure 44) was indicated to prolong the activated clotting time
(Figure 45) in order to minimise the risk of thrombosis during intravascular procedures47.
The reduction in the ECLS pump speed (Figure 46), flow (Figure 47), and pressure
differential (Figure 48) could have resulted from systemic hypotension contributing to low amounts
of blood to the pump. The ECLS was configured such that the centrifugal pump pulled blood from
the inferior vena cava and returned it into the right atrium; therefore, if the circulating volume was
low, the flow would decrease for a given pump speed and in this case, both rpm and flow would
reduce. Centrifugal ECLS pumps are known to be preload dependent and afterload sensitive48,
thereby making rpm and flows directly proportional to each other. The reason for the systemic
hypotension remains undetermined. It is possible that an unknown pulmonary component or product
produced in the smoke-damaged lungs of the sheep played a role. It must be noted that the body
temperature of the sheep was generally within the physiological range (Figure 49).
Certain observations regarding this study could affect the interpretation of red blood cell
indices and their derivatives. For example, animals differ from humans in that estimated changes in
plasma volume is preferably determined by changes in packed cell volume (PCV) or haemoglobin
concentration and total plasma protein (TPP)49-51. Moreover, in animals, there is a wider range of
normal PCV than TPP 52. In critical care for domestic animals, the change in both PCV and TPP is
most useful as a crude index of change in plasma volume53. A centrifuge that spins minute amounts
of blood for rapid, cost-effective determination of PCV and TPP permits instant adjustments in an
animal’s fluid needs. However, measurements of PCV and TPP were not conducted in the primary
study. As with all data that are collected with different objectives, it was tedious to align certain time
points with real-time observations made in the laboratory, particularly for data that was manually
input. There was also no information regarding pre-anaesthetic blood tests.
23
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

An additional limitation of this study is related to the overall objective of providing useful
information relevant to the sheep ECMO model in particular, and to the scientific community
interested in large animal experimentation and veterinary medicine in general. Because the method
of data collection method has not been validated across several laboratories or research groups, it is
considered relatively preliminary and further validation studies are required. Moreover, the number
of sheep (Figure 1) was low and this was particularly so in the injured/untreated and
placebo/untreated groups, thereby preventing comparisons between the treated and untreated sheep.
A further limitation is that cytokine levels, as predictors of lung injury, were not quantified. Using
ELISA assays to quantify cytokine levels proved difficult and the cost was prohibitive in the present
study, although subsequent efforts were made by a few members of the original research group in
this regard5. It is partially for this reason that pioneering studies16 have been proposed for the
development of proteogenomic assays as an alternative to ELISA—to learn from circulating markers
of acute inflammation in injured sheep used as models of intensive care, to understand critical illness.
On another note, it can be argued that sheep ECMO data is already out there however, cardiac
function and haemodynamic data has not been reported in sufficient detail in the manner that this
study has. Also, this paper has many figures which some readers may see as being unfocused. The
upside is that in recent times, academic journals now have sufficient capacity for lengthy, more
informative and detailed reports by preferably having all data in one publication, rather than
chopping it up into tight ‘salami’ publications. In the literature related to this burn and smoke
inhalation model lung, function has probably been reasonably well reported, but cardiac function is
probably less so – which makes this report to stand out strongly. Lastly, it can be construed that
observational control groups are too small (n=1 or 2). Putting out data from small groups and placing
it in graphs with experimental groups with n=8 may be seen as misleading, but cutting these
observations from the other two groups completely would be a disservice to science, considering that
few animals as possible are used for research purposes nowadays to prove a point.
Nevertheless, although ECMO treatment has been demonstrated to contribute to, and
exacerbate the deterioration of pulmonary pathology by reducing lung compliance and PaO 2/FiO2
24
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
5,9,22

ratio in sheep studies

, the understanding of ECMO in respiratory life-support in human medicine

continues to grow in a positive direction overall; moreover, there is evidence that it is useful as a lifesaving treatment. These novel observations from sheep could help in understanding similar
pathology such as that which occurs in animal victims of smoke inhalation from house or bush fires,
aspiration pneumonia secondary to tick paralysis, and in the management of COVID-19 in humans5456

.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has recently recognised and classified COVID-19,

caused by the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, as a global pandemic and public health emergency
57,58

. The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID) of the United States of

America recognises that coronaviruses constitute a large group of viruses known to cause respiratory
diseases, including the common cold59. However, in recent years, three novel members of this family
of viruses have arisen from animals to cause severe and extensive infection and death in humans60. In
addition to bats, a large number of coronaviruses are known to circulate in certain domestic animals
like cats and occasionally spill over to humans and cause serious illnesses, such as the SARS
coronavirus (SARS-CoV) that emerged in Southern China in 200261. As a future perspective, the
outcomes of the present study could be used to guide additional studies to enable the mortality
indicators and prognostic indicators associated with ECMO and allied technology to be further
evaluated and well understood in sheep and other experimental animals.

Conclusions
The results of this study demonstrated that ECLS contributed to the worsening of pulmonary
pathology by reducing lung compliance and PaO2/FiO2 ratio. The O2EI changes mirrored those of the
PaO2/FiO2 ratio and decreasing CPP was a predictor of a greater magnitude of cardiopulmonary
injury in sheep. These novel observations could help in further understanding similar pathology in
other patients; for example, in the resuscitation of animals injured from in house or bush fires. A
similar data acquisition approach could be used in evaluating the effectiveness of a given
experimental or clinical intervention to further the understanding of the clinical condition being
25
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

studied and to aid in the formulation of treatments aimed at improving the survival of animal
patients. In veterinary medicine, albeit now a considerably expensive and remote option, ECLS
knowledge could complement the treatment of potentially reversible aspiration pneumonia, a
secondary complication associated with both Ixodes holocyclus toxicity and laryngeal paralysis, in
valuable companion animals and in critically ill humans who require respiratory support, like
COVID-19 patients.

Data availability
Underlying data
Chemonges, Saul (2020), Cardiorespiratory physiological perturbations after acute smoke-induced
lung injury and during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support in sheep, v4, Dryad, Dataset,
https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.3r2280gd5.
This project contains the following underlying data:
C24H-01.xls
E24H-01 Saul.xls
E24H-02 Saul.xls
E24H-03 Saul.xls
E24H-04 Saul.xls
E24H-05 Saul.xls
E24H-06 - 4146 Saul.xls
E24H-07 Saul.xls
E24HE24H-Activated Clotting Time (Saul).xls
E24H-Activated Clotting Time (Saul).xls
E24H-Anaesthetics, Inotropes & Anticoagulants (Saul).xls
E24H-Arterial Blood Gas Values (Saul).xls
E24H-BP, ventilation & haemodynamic data (Saul).xls
26
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

E24H-Calculated Resp+Haemodynamic Variables (Saul).xls
E24H-Fluids and Urine Production (Saul).xls
Fig1.tif, Fig2.tif, Fig3.tif, Fig4.tif, Fig5.tif, Fig6.tif, Fig7.tif, Fig8.tif, Fig9.tif, Fig10.tif, Fig11.tif,
Fig12.tif, Fig13.tif, Fig14.tif, Fig15.tif, Fig16.tif, Fig17.tif, Fig18.tif, Fig19.tif, Fig20.tif, Fig21.tif,
Fig22.tif, Fig23.tif, Fig24.tif, Fig25.tif, Fig26.tif, Fig27.tif, Fig28.tif, Fig29.tif, Fig30.tif, Fig31.tif,
Fig32.tif, Fig33.tif, Fig34.tif, Fig35.tif, Fig36.tif, Fig37.tif, Fig38tif, Fig39.tif, Fig40.tif, Fig41.tif,
Fig42.tif, Fig43.tif, Fig44.tif, Fig45.tif, Fig46.tif, Fig47.tif, Fig48.tif, Fig49.tif
SC24H 1+2 PF and Carboxy.xlsx
SC24H-01 Saul.xls
SC24H-02 Saul.xls
SE24H-01 Saul.xls
SE24H-02 Saul.xls
SE24H-03 Saul.xls
SE24H-04 Saul.xls
SE24H-05 Saul.xls
SE24H-06 Saul.xls
SE24H-07 Saul.xls
SE24H-08 Saul.xls
SE24H-Activated Clotting Time (Saul).xls
SE24H-ALL SO FAR (6) Saul.xls
SE24H-Anaesthetics, Inotropes & Anticoagulants (Saul).xls
SE24H-Arterial Blood Gases (Saul).xls
SE24H-Calculated Resp + Haemodynamic Variables (Saul).xls
SE24H-Fluids and Urine Production (Saul).xls
SE24H-Physiologic monitoring data (Saul).xls
Data are available under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license
(CC-BY 4.0). (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode).
27
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Competing interests
A previously undisclosed conflict of interest became apparent from a section of adjunct persons
within the research group when important early findings of this paper were first presented at an
academic milestone seminar at The University of Queensland in August 2013. Therefore, this report
comprises work completed during studies for higher-degree research from 7th September 2012 to 23rd
August 2013, only.

Author Contributions
The author (SC) was solely responsible for the study design, writing the manuscript, analysing and
interpreting the data, and final approval of the manuscript. In addition, SC is fully accountable for the
work.
This study was funded by an Australian Postgraduate Award (APA) scholarship through the
University of Queensland for studies for higher-degree research and The Prince Charles Hospital
Foundation 2013 Equipment Grants Program. Even though the original data collection was funded
by the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC), this research was not part of the
NHMRC-funded project. It was conducted at Queensland University of Technology Medical
Engineering Research Facility (QUT-MERF).

Acknowledgements
Gratitude is extended to members of the sheep ECMO research team at the Critical Care Research
Group laboratory that is affiliated with The University of Queensland for their various roles during
this research and the staff at QUT-MERF for assistance in the care of the sheep. The author is also
thankful to Dr. Jane Charbonneau and SCRIBENDI for editorial support.

28
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References
1.

Chemonges, S., et al. Optimal management of the critically ill: anaesthesia, monitoring, data capture,
and point-of-care technological practices in ovine models of critical care. Biomed Res Int 2014,
468309 (2014).

2.

Platts, D.G., et al. A novel echocardiographic imaging technique, intracatheter echocardiography, to
guide veno-venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation cannulae placement in a validated ovine
model. Intensive Care Medicine Experimental 2, 2 (2014).

3.

Platts, D.G., et al. Feasibility of Perflutren Microsphere Contrast Transthoracic Echocardiography in
the Visualization of Ventricular Endocardium during Venovenous Extracorporeal Membrane
Oxygenation in a Validated Ovine Model. Echocardiography 32, 548-556 (2015).

4.

Shekar, K., et al. Development of simulated and ovine models of extracorporeal life support to
improve understanding of circuit-host interactions. Crit. Care Resusc. 14, 105-111 (2012).

5.

Passmore, M.R., et al. Inflammation and lung injury in an ovine model of extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation support. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 311, L1202-L1212 (2016).

6.

Rais-Bahrami, K. & Van Meurs, K.P. Venoarterial versus venovenous ECMO for neonatal respiratory
failure. Semin. Perinatol. 38, 71-77 (2014).

7.

Brenner, P., et al. Prolonged extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) in 231 patients after
different indications with low cardiac output - a single-center experience. The Thoracic and
Cardiovascular Surgeon 60, V23 (2012).

8.

Fraser, J.F., et al. ECMO – the clinician’s view. ISBT Science Series 7, 82-88 (2012).

9.

Millar, J.E., et al. Combined Mesenchymal Stromal Cell Therapy and ECMO in ARDS: A Controlled
Experimental Study in Sheep. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. (2020).

10.

Kimura, R., et al. Increasing duration of smoke exposure induces more severe lung injury in sheep. J
Appl Physiol 64, 1107-1113 (1988).

11.

Zwischenberger, J.B., et al. Pathophysiology of Ovine Smoke Inhalation Injury Treated with
Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation. Chest 103, 1582-1586 (1993).

12.

NHMRC. Australian code of practice for the care and use of animals for scientific purposes.
(NHMRC, Canberra, Australia, 2013).

13.

Kilkenny, C., Browne, W., Cuthill, I.C., Emerson, M. & Altman, D.G. Animal research: reporting in vivo
experiments: the ARRIVE guidelines. Br J Pharmacol 160, 1577-1579 (2010).

14.

Kilkenny, C., Browne, W.J., Cuthill, I.C., Emerson, M. & Altman, D.G. Improving bioscience research
reporting: the ARRIVE guidelines for reporting animal research. PLoS Biol 8, e1000412 (2010).

15.

Tung, J.P., et al. A novel in vivo ovine model of transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI). Vox
Sang. 100, 219-230 (2011).

16.

Chemonges, S., Tung, J.P. & Fraser, J.F. Proteogenomics of selective susceptibility to endotoxin
using circulating acute phase biomarkers and bioassay development in sheep: a review. Proteome
Sci 12, 12 (2014).

17.

Chemonges , S. Suspected selective susceptibility to endotoxin in an ovine model. Online J Vet Res
18, 941-963 (2014).

18.

Riedel, T., Fraser, J.F., Dunster, K., Fitzgibbon, J. & Schibler, A. Effect of smoke inhalation on
viscoelastic properties and ventilation distribution in sheep. J Appl Physiol 101, 763-770 (2006).

19.

Chemonges , S. Critical care management of sheep receiving extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation

29
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

due to smoke induced acute lung injury (ECMO S-ALI) and acute sepsis. in Australian and New

Zealand College of Veterinary Scientists: College Science Week (ANZCVS, Surfers Paradise,
Australia, 2013).
20.

Chemonges , S. Contemporary data capture, anaesthesia monitoring and point-of-care technology in
critical care research settings for animal models. in Australian and New Zealand College of Veterinary
Scientists: College Science Week (ANZCVS, Surfers Paradise, Australia, 2013).

21.

Margaret Passmore, L.F., Kimble Dunster, Saul Chemonges, Sara Diab, Robyn Minchinton, Kiran
Shekar, John Fraser. ECMO contributes to lung injury in an ovine model of veno-venous ECMO. in
ANZICS/ACCCN Intensive Care Annual Scientific Meeting (ASM) (Hotel Grand Chancellor Hobart,
2013).

22.

Margaret Passmore, L.F., Kimble Dunster, Saul Chemonges, Sara Diab, Robyn Minchinton, Kiran
Shekar, John Fraser. ECMO contributes to lung injury in an ovine model of veno-venous ECMO. in
1st International Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Extracorporeal Life Support
Organization (APELSO), Vol. Volume: 4 (Beijing, China, 2013).

23.

Margaret, P., et al. Lung Inflammatory Changes In An Ovine Model Of Venovenous Extracorporeal
Membrane Oxygenation. in B47. ACUTE RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME A3064-A3064
(American Thoracic Society, 2014).

24.

Quinn, C.T., Raisis, A.L. & Musk, G.C. Evaluation of Masimo signal extraction technology pulse
oximetry in anaesthetized pregnant sheep. Vet. Anaesth. Analg. 40, 149-156 (2013).

25.

McDonald, C.I., Fung, Y.L. & Fraser, J.F. Antioxidant Trace Element Reduction in an In Vitro
Cardiopulmonary Bypass Circuit. ASAIO J. 58, 217-222 (2012).

26.

McDonald, C.I., et al. The impact of acute lung injury, ECMO and transfusion on oxidative stress and
plasma selenium levels in an ovine model. J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol. 30, 4-10 (2015).

27.

Lange, M., et al. No correlation between initial arterial carboxyhemoglobin level and degree of lung
injury following ovine burn and smoke inhalation. Exp. Lung Res. 40, 99 (2014).

28.

Combs, M.D.A., Rendell, D., Reed, K.F.M., Mace, W.J. & Quinn, J.C. Evidence of dehydration and
electrolyte disturbances in cases of perennial ryegrass toxicosis in Australian sheep. Aust Vet J 92,
107-113 (2014).

29.

Westphal, M., et al. Carboxyhemoglobin formation following smoke inhalation injury in sheep is
interrelated with pulmonary shunt fraction. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 311, 754-758 (2003).

30.

Westphal, M., et al. Combined burn and smoke inhalation injury impairs ovine hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction. Crit. Care Med. 34, 1428-1436 (2006).

31.

Bradberry, S. Methaemoglobinaemia. Medicine 35, 552-553 (2007).

32.

Adams, D., McKinley, M., Colditz, I. & Dart, C. The Sheep. in Australian and New Zealand Council for
the Care of Animals in Research & Teaching (ANZCCART) Humane Science., Vol. ANZCCART Fact
Sheet A9 (Australian and New Zealand Council for the Care of Animals in Research & Teaching, The
University of Adelaide, 2009.).

33.

McGrath, S.R., Lievaart, J.J. & Friend, M.A. Extent of utilisation of dual‐purpose wheat for grazing by
late‐pregnant and lambing ewes and producer‐reported incidence of health issues in southern New
South Wales. Aust Vet J 91, 432-436 (2013).

34.

Handy, J.M. & Soni, N. Physiological effects of hyperchloraemia and acidosis. Br. J. Anaesth. 101,
141-150 (2008).

35.

Peacock, R.E. & Smart, L. False hyperchloraemia in a dog secondary to ingestion of horse feed

30
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

supplemented with potassium bromide. Aust Vet J 91, 320-322 (2013).

36.

Duhm, J. & Göbel, B.O. Na+-K+ transport and volume of rat erythrocytes under dietary K+ deficiency.
The American journal of physiology 246, C20-29 (1984).

37.

Mien, T.X.N., et al. Effects of K+-deficient diets with and without NaCl supplementation on Na+, K+,
and H2O transporters' abundance along the nephron. American Journal of Physiology - Renal
Physiology 303, 92-104 (2012).

38.

Oh, Y.T., Kim, J. & Youn, J.H. Role of pituitary in K+ homeostasis: impaired renal responses to
altered K+ intake in hypophysectomized rats. American journal of physiology. Regulatory, integrative
and comparative physiology 304, R1166-1174 (2013).

39.

Russell, K.E. & Roussel, A.J. Evaluation of the Ruminant Serum Chemistry Profile. Vet. Clin. North
Am. Food Anim. Pract. 23, 403-426 (2007).

40.

Sejrsen, K., Hvelplund, T. & Nielsen, M.O. Ruminant physiology: digestion, metabolism and impact of
nutrition on gene expression, immunology and stress, (Wageningen Academic Publishers,
Wageningen, 2006).

41.

Ewaschuk, J.B., Naylor, J.M. & Zello, G.A. D-lactate in human and ruminant metabolism. J Nutr 135,
1619-1625 (2005).

42.

Pohlmann, J.R., et al. A low mortality model of chronic pulmonary hypertension in sheep. The Journal
of surgical research 175, 44-48 (2012).

43.

Frea, S., et al. Echocardiographic evaluation of right ventricular stroke work index in advanced heart
failure: a new index? J. Card. Fail. 18, 886-893 (2012).

44.

Cameli, M., et al. Right ventricular longitudinal strain and right ventricular stroke work index in patients
with severe heart failure: left ventricular assist device suitability for transplant candidates. Transplant.
Proc. 44, 2013 (2012).

45.

Choi, J.-O., et al. Noninvasive assessment of left ventricular stroke work index in patients with severe
mitral regurgitation: correlation with invasive measurement and exercise capacity. Echocardiography
(Mount Kisco, N.Y.) 27, 1161 (2010).

46.

Raghunathan, K., Barbeito, A. & MacLeod, D. Goal-directed advanced cardiac life support: coronary
perfusion pressure as a target during resuscitation. Crit. Care Med. 41, 2817-2818 (2013).

47.

Oliver, W.C. Anticoagulation and coagulation management for ECMO. Semin. Cardiothorac. Vasc.
Anesth. 13, 154-175 (2009).

48.

Jayanthkumar, H.S., Murugesan, C., Rajkumar, J., Harish, B.R. & Muralidhar, K. Our experience with
implantation of VentrAssist left ventricular assist device. Indian J. Anaesth. 57, 56-61 (2013).

49.

Falzon, L.C., et al. A longitudinal study on the effect of lambing season on the periparturient egg rise
in Ontario sheep flocks. Prev. Vet. Med. 110, 467-480 (2013).

50.

Hayes, G.M., Mathews, K., Floras, A. & Dewey, C. Refractometric total plasma protein measurement
as a cage‐side indicator of hypoalbuminemia and hypoproteinemia in hospitalized dogs. Journal of
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 21, 356-362 (2011).

51.

White, A., Reyes, A., Godoy, A. & Martínez, R. Effects of transport and racing on ionic changes in
thoroughbred race horses. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology -- Part A: Physiology 99, 343346 (1991).

52.

Tang, Z., Lee, J.H., Louie, R.F. & Kost, G.J. Effects of different hematocrit levels on glucose
measurements with handheld meters for point-of-care testing. Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med. 124, 11351140 (2000).

31
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

53.

Stafford, K.J., et al. The physical state and plasma biochemical profile of young calves on arrival at a
slaughter plant. N. Z. Vet. J. 49, 142-142 (2001).

54.

Jacobs, J.P., et al. Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation in the Treatment of Severe Pulmonary and
Cardiac Compromise in COVID-19: Experience with 32 patients. ASAIO J. (2020).

55.

Ramanathan, K., et al. Planning and provision of ECMO services for severe ARDS during the COVID19 pandemic and other outbreaks of emerging infectious diseases. Lancet Respir Med 8, 518-526
(2020).

56.

Rajagopal, K., et al. Advanced Pulmonary and Cardiac Support of COVID-19 Patients: Emerging
Recommendations From ASAIO-A "Living Working Document". ASAIO J. (2020).

57.

Sohrabi, C., et al. World Health Organization declares global emergency: A review of the 2019 novel
coronavirus (COVID-19). Int. J. Surg. 76, 71-76 (2020).

58.

Rothan, H.A. & Byrareddy, S.N. The epidemiology and pathogenesis of coronavirus disease (COVID19) outbreak. J. Autoimmun. 109, 26 (2020).

59.

NIAID. Coronaviruses. (2020).

60.

Chen, Y., Liu, Q. & Guo, D. Emerging coronaviruses: Genome structure, replication, and
pathogenesis. J. Med. Virol. 92, 418-423 (2020).

61.

Chan, J.F., To, K.K., Tse, H., Jin, D.Y. & Yuen, K.Y. Interspecies transmission and emergence of
novel viruses: lessons from bats and birds. Trends Microbiol. 21, 544-555 (2013).

32
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Table 1. Characteristics of treated and untreated groups (control experiments) of sheep
Experiment Date of

Sheep No.

Age (Y)

Weight (kg)

Length of

BSA

Group

experiment

E24H

06/10/2011

E24H-01/390

2

50

110

1.29

20/10/2011

E24H-02

2

47.6

110

1.25

17/11/2011

E24H-03

2

51

110

1.31

01/03/2012

E24H/4616

2

50

110

1.29

29/03/2012

E24H-05/4627

2

47

110

1.24

04/04/2012

E24H-06/4146

2

40

110

1.11

12/04/2012

E24H-07/4032

2

52.5

110

1.34

03/05/2012

E24H-08/4630

2

53

110

1.34

02/02/2012

SE24H-01/4139

2

44

110

1.19

09/02/2012

SE24H-02/4542

2

53

110

1.34

16/02/2012

SE24H-03/4280

2

45.5

110

1.21

23/02/2012

SE24H-04/4624

2

50

110

1.29

17/05/2012

SE24H-05/4458

2

55

140

1.38

24/05/2012

SE24H-06/8461

2

46

140

1.22

24/01/2013

SE24H-07/09C8032

3

52

130

1.33

21/02/2013

SE24H-09A0142

2

50

140

1.29

18/06/2013

SC24H-01

2

51

140

1.31

27/06/2013

SC24H-02

2

57

140

1.41

08/08/2013

C24H-01

2

53

140

1.34

SE24H

SC24H

C24H

Sheep (cm)

Table 1 legend: BSA = Body surface area; E24H = uninjured sheep treated with extracorporeal life
support (ECLS) for 24 hours (uninjured/treated); SE24H = sheep with acute smoke-induced lung
injury treated with ECLS for 24 hours (injured/treated); SC24H = sheep with acute smoke-induced
lung injury monitored for 24 hours without ECLS (injured/untreated); C24H = sheep subjected to
room air injury as a control for smoke and monitored for 24 hours without ECLS
1
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(placebo/untreated).

Figure 1. Body weights (Mean ± SD) of smoke and non-smoke injured sheep that received
extracorporeal life support (ECLS) as compared to those of untreated controls.

Figure 2. Pulmonary compliance (Mean ± SD) in smoke and non-smoke injured sheep that
received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated controls. Dotted lines
represent error bar margins.

Figure 3. Arterial oxyhaemoglobin saturation (SpO2) (Mean ± SD) in smoke and non-smoke
injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated
controls.

Figure 4. End-tidal carbon dioxide tension (etCO2) (Mean ± SD) in smoke and non-smoke
injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated
controls.

Figure 5. Arterial blood pH (Mean ± SD) over a 24h period in smoke and non-smoke injured
sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated controls. The
dots represent hourly time-points.

Figure 6. Mean arterial carbon dioxide partial pressure (pCO2) (Mean ± SD) in smoke and
non-smoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in
untreated controls.

Figure 7. Arterial oxygen tension (pO2) (Mean ± SD with no error bars shown) in smoke and
non-smoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in
2
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

untreated controls.

Figure 8. Haemoglobin concentration [Hb] (Mean ± SD) in smoke and non-smoke injured
sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in treated controls.

Figure 9. Fraction of oxyhaemoglobin (FO2Hb) (Mean ± SD) in smoke and non-smoke injured
sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated controls

Figure 10. Fraction of carboxyhaemoglobin (FCOHb) (Mean ± SD) in smoke and non-smoke
injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated
controls.

Figure 11. Fraction of methaemoglobin (FMetHb) (Mean ± SD) in smoke and non-smoke
injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated
controls.

Figure 12. Calculated haematocrit (Hct) (%) (Mean ± SD) in smoke and non-smoke injured
sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated controls.

Figure 13. Concentration of sodium ions in blood (Mean ± SD) in smoke and non-smoke
injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated
controls.

Figure 14. Concentration of calcium ions in blood (Mean ± SD) in smoke and non-smoke
injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated
controls.

3
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 15. Concentration of chloride ions in blood (Mean ± SD) in smoke and non-smoke
injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated
controls.

Figure 16. Concentration of potassium ions in blood (Mean ± SD, error bars not shown) in
smoke and non-smoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to
that in untreated controls.

Figure 17. Anion gap (Mean ± SD, error bars not shown) in smoke and non-smoke injured
sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated controls.

Figure 18. Blood glucose concentration (Mean ± SD) in smoke and non-smoke injured sheep
that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated controls.

Figure 19. Blood lactate concentration (Mean ± SD) in smoke and non-smoke injured sheep
that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated controls.

Figure 20. Concentration of base (ecf) in blood (Mean ± SD) for smoke and non-smoke injured
sheep receiving extracorporeal life support alongside untreated controls.

Figure 21. Blood bicarbonate concentration (Mean ± SD) for smoke and non-smoke injured
sheep receiving extracorporeal life support alongside untreated controls.

Figure 22. Composite heart rate (HR) (Mean ± SD) in smoke and non-smoke injured sheep that
received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated controls.

Figure 23. Mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) (Mean ± SD) in smoke and non-smoke injured
4
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated controls.
Dotted lines represent one-sided margins of error bars.

Figure 24. Pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) (Mean ± SD, no error bars shown) in smoke and
non-smoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in
untreated controls.

Figure 25. Mean central venous pressure (CVP) (Mean) in smoke and non-smoke injured sheep
that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated controls.

Figure 26. Mixed venous oxygen saturation (SvO2) (Mean ± SD, error bars not shown) in
smoke and non-smoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to
that in untreated controls.

Figure 27. Continuous cardiac output (CCO) (Mean ± SD, error bars not shown) in smoke and
non-smoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in
untreated controls.

Figure 28. Stroke volume (Mean ± SD error bars not shown) in smoke and non-smoke injured
sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated controls.

Figure 29. Stroke volume index (SVI) (Mean ± SD, error bars not shown) in smoke and nonsmoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated
controls.

Figure 30. Cardiac index (Mean ± SD error bars not shown) in smoke and non-smoke injured
sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated controls.
5
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 31. Systemic vascular resistance index (SVRI) (Mean ± SD error bars not shown) in
smoke and non-smoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to
that in untreated controls.

Figure 32. Pulmonary vascular resistance index (PVRI) (Mean ± SD, error bars not shown) in
smoke and non-smoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to
that in controls.

Figure 33. Right ventricular stroke work index (RVWSI) (Mean ± SD, error bars not shown) in
smoke and non-smoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to
that in untreated controls.

Figure 34. Left ventricular stroke work index (Mean ± SD error bars not shown) in smoke and
non-smoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in
untreated controls.

Figure 35. Coronary perfusion pressure (CPP) (Mean ± SD, error bars not shown) in smoke
and non-smoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support alongside as compared
to that in controls.

Figure 36. Arterial oxygen content (Mean ± SD error bars not shown) in smoke and non-smoke
injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated
controls.

Figure 37. Oxygen delivery index (DO2I) (Mean ± SD error bars not shown) in smoke and nonsmoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated
controls.
6
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Figure 38. Oxygen extraction index (O2EI) (Mean ± SD error bars not shown) in smoke and

non-smoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in
untreated controls.

Figure 39. Total running intravenous fluids per unit body weight (Mean ± SD) in smoke and
non-smoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to those in
untreated controls over a 24h period.

Figure 40. Urine output (Mean ± SD) in smoke and non-smoke injured sheep that received
extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated controls over a 24h period. Lower
and upper bar limits correspond to minimum and maximum urine output, respectively.

Figure 41. Alfaxalone infusion (Mean ± SD) indicating the titration range in smoke and nonsmoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated
controls over a 24-hour period.

Figure 42. Ketamine IV infusion (Mean ± SD) indicating the titration range in smoke and nonsmoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in untreated
controls over a 24h period.

Figure 43. Midazolam IV infusion (Mean ± SD) indicating the titration range in smoke and
non-smoke injured sheep receiving extracorporeal life support as compared to that in
untreated controls over a 24-hour period.

Figure 44. Heparin (10 U/mL) infusion rate (Mean ± SD, error bars not shown) in smoke and
non-smoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in
untreated controls.
7
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 45. Activated clotting time (ACT) (Mean ± SD, error bars not shown) in smoke and
non-smoke injured sheep that received extracorporeal life support as compared to that in
untreated controls.

Figure 46. Extracorporeal life support pump speed (Mean ± SD) for smoke and non-smoke
injured sheep that received treatment.

Figure 47. Blood flow (Mean ± SD) through an extracorporeal life support pump for smoke
and non-smoke injured sheep that received treatment.

Figure 48. Pressure differential (Δ-p) (Mean ± SD) across the extracorporeal life support pump
for smoke and non-smoke injured sheep that received treatment

Figure 49. Body temperature (Mean ± SD) of smoke and non-smoke injured sheep that
received extracorporeal life support as compared to that of untreated controls.

8
Information Classification: General

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/058511; this version posted July 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

