bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Morphogenetic coupling leads to pattern emergence in
the presomitic mesoderm.
Timothy Fulton1 , Seongwon Hwang1 , Yuxuan Wang1 ,
Lewis Thomson 1 , Bethan Clark 1,2 , Berta Verd,1,3∗ Benjamin Steventon1∗
1

Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK

2

Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
3

Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, UK
∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed;

E-mail: berta.verdfernandez@zoo.ox.ac.uk, bjs57@cam.ac.uk
Pattern formation in development has been principally studied in tissues that
are not undergoing extensive cellular rearrangement. However, in most developmental contexts, gene expression domains emerge as cells re-arrange their
spatial positions within the tissue, providing an additional, and seldom explored, level of complexity to the process of pattern formation in vivo. To investigate this issue, we addressed the regulation of TBox expression in the presomitic mesoderm (PSM) as this tissue develops in zebrafish embryos. Here,
cells must differentiate in a manner that leads to well-defined spatial gene expression domains along the tissue while undergoing rapid movements to generate axial length. We find that in vivo, mesoderm progenitors undergo TBox
differentiation over a broad range of time scales while in vitro their differentiation is simultaneous. By reverse-engineering a gene regulatory network (GRN)
to recapitulate TBox gene expression, we were able to predict the populationlevel differentiation dynamics observed in culture, but not in vivo. In order
to address this discrepancy in differentiation dynamics we developed a ‘Live
Modelling’ framework that allowed us to simulate the GRN on 3D tracking
1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

data generated from large-scale time-lapse imaging datasets of the developing PSM. Once the network was simulated on a realistic representation of the
cells’ morphogenetic context, the model was able to recapitulate the range of
differentiation time scales observed in vivo, and revealed that these were necessary for TBox gene expression patterns to emerge correctly at the level of
the tissue. This work thus highlights a previously unappreciated role for cell
movement as a driver of pattern formation in development.

As an embryo takes shape, two processes must occur in perfect harmony: cell fate decision
making and cell movements that drive morphogenesis. At the tissue level, these two processes
appear ordered and predictable leading to the emergence of well-defined gene expression domains throughout the embryo. While the role played by gene regulatory networks (GRNs) and
morphogens in patterning the embryo has been extensively studied in multiple contexts (1),
much less is known about the role of cell movements during this process. Here, we aim to determine how extracellular signals, cell-intrinsic gene-regulatory networks and cell movements
act together to generate stable TBox expression domains along the zebrafish presomitic mesoderm (PSM). Within this tissue, cells transition from a tbxta positive progenitor state, upregulate
tbx16 as they become specified to the pre-somitic mesoderm, and then switch to a tbx24 postive
state as they enter the PSM prior to somitogenesis. Both FGF and Wnt signalling are known regulators of TBox gene expression within the zebrafish PSM (2–4). Response of the TBox GRN
to Wnt and FGF inputs must be tightly coordinated in space, as PSM maturation ultimately
directly links with oscillations of Notch signal activity which are known to be important for
somitogenesis (5). To assess how TBox gene expression dynamics, Wnt/FGF signal pathway
activity, and cell movements act together during PSM maturation we first obtained quantitative
measures of each of these components.
To quantify the pattern of TBox expression across the PSM, we performed in situ Hybridisation Chain Reaction (HCR) stains at the 20 somite stage for tbxta, tbx16 and tbx24 mRNA,

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

that show the form spatially well-defined domains along the PSM (Figure 1A-B; D-G). In
order to only capture the PSM expression of tbxta, the notochord and notochord progenitors
were masked prior to analysis to exclude them from the measurements (Figure S1A-D). The
normalised mean expression of each of the three TBox transcription factors was plotted on a
normalised posterior to anterior axis, between 0 at the posterior end of the PSM and 1 at the
posterior boundary of the most recently formed somite (Fig. 1C). Expression was normalised
across multiple embryos between 0 and 1, with 0 representing the lowest mean expression, and
1 the highest mean expression. This describes a transition from an initial domain of tbxta/tbx16
co-expression in the PSM, to only tbx16, followed by only tbx24 expression in the anterior-most
end of the tissue.
We next sought to quantify the spatial distribution of Wnt and FGF signalling activity, as
these signals have been demonstrated to have a role in spatiotemporal regulation of somite formation. Wnt/TCF signalling was spatially quantified using a 7XTCF promoter fusion to a GFP
reporter (6), with HCR performed against the gfp mRNA to give an immediate readout of the
reporter activity (Figure 1H). FGF activity was quantified using an antibody against diphosphorylated ERK, as a readout of FGF ligand binding the FGF receptor (Figure 1I). These signalling
profiles across the PSM were plotted along the same normalised axes as the TBox transcription
factors and show a posterior to anterior gradient of Wnt, followed by an overlapping domain of
FGF (Figure 1J)
While these profiles describe the gene expression domains’ spatial arrangements, it is important to note that the rate of cell rearrangement varies significantly along the PSM. In particular,
previous studies have characterised this tissue as undergoing a fluid-to-solid transition close to
the tbx16/tbx24 expression boundary (7, 8), where cell rearrangements quickly go from being
extensive to practically non-existent. As a consequence of extensive cell mixing in the posterior
progenitor zone, individual cells must somehow control their differentiation dynamics to match
the timing of entry into the anterior PSM. To directly visualise the position at which the fluid-tosolid transition occurs, a number of photolabels were placed in the posterior, mid and anterior
PSM using the photoconvertible nuclear protein, KikumeGR (9–11) (Figure 1K-M). Over the

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 1: Mesoderm progenitors differentiate into mature PSM over a range of time scales.
(Continues on the next page)

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 1: (From the previous page) Using HCR, the domains of gene expression for the three
TBox transcription factors (A) Tbxta and (B) Tbx16 and Tbx24 (also known as Tbx6) were
identified. (C) These were quantified along a normalised PSM length where 0 is posteriormost
PSM and 1 is the posterior boundary of the most recently formed somite. Normalised expression
is taken by mean intensity of each HCR signal divided by the maximum mean value from
multiple embryos. Line plotted is the mean fitted curve taken from multiple fixed samples.
(D-G) Zoom in of multiplex HCR showing all three TBox transcription factors in the posterior
as a 3D rendering of a confocal image and 2µm slice. Wnt signalling was quantified using
(H) a 7XTCF::GFP reporter with HCR used against gfp mRNA to give an immediate readout
of transcription. (I) FGF signalling was quantified using an antibody against diphosphorylated
ERK and (J) plotted on the same normalised axis. Using (K) small round labels placed along
the length of the PSM using a photoconvertible nuclear protein, Kikume-GR, the degree of label
spread (L-M) can be observed over time. Most spread is observed in the posterior label, with
the least spread in the mid- and anterior label. (N) labels placed in the most posterior region of
the PSM demonstrate that (O-P) the label spreads significantly over 90 minutes with the (P) first
cell entering a newly formed somite in 3 hours. Plots in C and J show trend line compiled from
9 embryos. Labels in K-M representative of 2 labelled embryos. Labels in N-P representative
of 4 embryos.
course of two hours, the posterior label becomes fully intermixed with unlabelled cells, whereas
the middle and anterior labels remain unmixed, showing that these labelled cells travelled anteriorly as a single cohort (Supplementary Movie 1). Labels such as these can also me used to
infer the minimum length of time taken by a mesoderm progenitor to differentiate into mature
mesoderm and form a somite. We placed smaller posterior labels in the progenitor zone of a
20 somite stage zebrafish embryo and measured how long before the first labelled cell reached
a somite. The fastest cell from these posterior labels reproducibly entered the most recently
formed somite in three hours, while the rest of the cells remain spread throughout the PSM
(Figure 1N-P) revealing that progenitors differentiate into mature PSM over a broad range of
time scales. We assume that the longest time period over which a cell can take to differentiate is
at least six hours as a small proportion of labelled cells are still located in the progenitor domain
many hours after labelling. Together, these labels provide the range of timescales over which a
cell can transition through the PSM (Figure 2A).
If we assume that the fastest cell traverses the PSM at constant speed, taking the most
direct route from posterior to anterior in three hours (Figure 2B), we can translate space into
time and approximate its gene expression and signalling dynamics from the previously obtained

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

quantitative gene expression and signalling profiles (Figure 1C; 1J) where the normalised PSM
length on the x-axis now represents three hours of development. Our labelling experiments
have shown, in agreement with previous studies, that cells spend varying amounts of time in
the progenitor region, and progress towards the somites at a relatively constant pace once they
have entered the PSM. To account for the slower differentiation dynamics of cells which remain
longer within the posterior tailbud, we assume that they experience the high Wnt, low FGF and
express high tbxta/tbx16 levels while they are in the tailbud (Figure 2D). Using these generalised
gene expression and dynamics, we set out to reverse engineer a GRN model to address the
question of how spatio-temporal coordination of cell fate decisions may be regulated in this
system.
We formulated a GRN model of TBox transcription factors and their external signals Wnt
and FGF in terms of a dynamical system (See Materials and Methods). Gene products of the
three TBox genes considered (tbxta, tbx16 and tbx24) constitute the network’s nodes and are
represented by the state variables of the system, while the interactions between the genes and
from the external signals (Wnt and FGF) are represented by model parameters (Figure 2C).
As we have seen, mesoderm progenitors take anywhere between three and six hours to make
their way into a somite from the tailbud, expressing a stereotypical progression of TBox genes
(Figure 1A-C; Figure 2A-B). A suitable GRN will therefore be able to tune the onset of TBox
differentiation according to differing lengths of time spent in the tailbud. We used a Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm to infer candidate networks which recapitulate the range
of TBox gene expression dynamics observed in vivo. Out of 100 independent optimisation runs,
56 networks were able to recapitulate the expression dynamics of the full spectrum of differentiation timescales observed in progenitor cells (Figure 2D). All 56 networks share the sign
of more than half of their parameters (13/24), and pairwise comparison between the networks
shows that on average they differ by three interactions. Although the networks do not form
clear distinct clusters (Figure S2) they resemble each other in topology. We decided to select
a network for further study by filtering based on the sign of three network interactions that are
very well-established in the literature: the activation of tbx24 by Tbx16 (2,12), the activation of

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

tbx16 by FGF (3, 13) and the repression of tbx24 by Wnt (12) (Figure 2C, Table S1).
In order to understand how the inferred network controls the onset of differentiation in response to Wnt and FGF signalling dynamics we turned to phase space analysis. The network
has been formulated as a non-autonomous dynamical system to accommodate the signalling
dynamics, which causes the underlying phase portraits to also be dynamic. We use instantaneous phase portraits (14, 15) at every time point to characterise how the changing dynamical
regime shapes the cells’ trajectories (Supplementary Movie 2-5). We find that regardless of the
time spent in the progenitor state (tailbud) the progression of dynamical regimes is always the
same: cells start at a high tbxta/tbx16 stable steady state, then a bifurcation at Wnt = 0.98 and
FGF = 0.22 annihilates this steady state, releasing the trajectory which makes its way towards
low tbxta/tbx16 values, before converging towards a newly appeared stable steady state at high
tbx24 values. According to the model, the variation in differentiation timescales between different cells stems from the different amounts of time spent at the initial stable steady state, which
is sustained by the initial concentrations of (high) Wnt and (low) FGF. However, the model also
predicts that this steady state will disappear, and therefore that differentiation will begin, upon
exposure of the cells to small amounts of FGF (FGF = 0.36) while still in a high Wnt signalling
environment (Wnt = 0.98), suggesting that the observed signalling dynamics are not strictly required for the correct up-regulation of tbx24 (Figure 2E) once a relatively low threshold of FGF
has been met. This threshold in the embryo is already encountered by cells at 11% posterioranterior (the tip of the tailbud being 0% and the most posterior somite boundary 100%) position.
Note that a 11% posterior-anterior position is well embedded in the tailbud region.
The observation that posterior progenitor cells should differentiate into tbx24 positive paraxial mesoderm in the absence of exposure to the full dynamics of Wnt and FGF signals is surprising given the known role of FGF in regulating PSM development and maturation. To test this
prediction experimentally, we made use of an in vitro culture method that has previously been
shown so support the autonomous oscillations of the segmentation clock (16). We explant the
posterior 30% of the progenitor zone at the 18 somite stage and cultured them as single cells in
a fully defined L15 medium without any signal supplementation (Figure 3E-F). Our assumption

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 2: A reverse engineered GRN that tunes the onset of differentiation in response
to external signals. (A) Cells differentiate along a range of timescales, with the fastest cell
entering a somite in three hours with slower cells taking a range of time scales to differentiate.
The timescale over which a cell takes to differentiate (B) is given by the period of time taken
spent in the posterior of the PSM. (Continues on the next page).

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 2: (From the previous page.) (C) Using these timescales and patterns of gene expression
in space, a reverse engineered gene regulatory network was produced. This model was demonstrated to reproduce (D) the gene expression pattern across a range of timescales between the
fastest and slowest assumed time scales. The signalling dynamic of (E) FGF is shown to be
essential for initiating the differentiation of progenitors to tbx24 postitive, with only a small
increase in FGF, up to 36% of the maximum in vivo, required to initiate differentiation
is that once removed from their signalling environments, cells’ Wnt and FGF levels will remain
constant, and that, in line with model predictions, only those cells that have already experienced
the FGF threshold will differentiate. Those cells below the threshold of FGF will remain in a
progenitor state. To determine the activity of Wnt and FGF pathways in dissociated cells we
first performed qPCR against axin2 and sprouty4 (Figure 3A-B), which function as transcriptional readouts of Wnt and FGF signalling respectively. Both sprouty4 and axin2 maintained
the same concentration present in the tailbud explants as measured immediately after dissection
and prior to dissociation. To follow the profile of Wnt and FGF in single cells, we performed
HCR against the gfp of the 7XTCF::GFP reporter and an antibody stain against diphosphorylated ERK (Figure 3C-D; 3M). These stains were both imaged at the single cell level and
confirmed no significant spike in FGF or Wnt activity occurred across the time course, with a
modest decrease in FGF signalling in the final hours whilst maintaining the population average
(Figure 3C).
So far, we have used the model to simulate TBox expression dynamics in a generalised
cell. In order to better compare model predictions to the experimental data obtained from both
qPCR experiments and single cell HCR stains we simulated TBox expression dynamics in a
population of in silico-dissected tailbud progenitors. We segmented the nuclei and quantified
the levels of tbxta, tbx16 and tbx24 of all the cells in the posterior 30% region of the PSM of
an HCR-stained 18ss embryo; a total of 736 cells. These concentrations were used as the initial
conditions from which to simulate the GRN model in every cell. Wnt and FGF values were
inferred from the Wnt and FGF expression profiles (Figure 1J) depending on a cells relative
antero-posterior position and kept constant throughout. Simulated qPCR results were obtained
by pooling the concentrations of the TBox genes in every cell at given time points. Qualitatively, we see a good correspondence between simulated (Figure 3G) and experimental (Figure
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

3H) qPCR profiles for both tbx16 and tbx24, particularly over the first four hours post dissociation with more discrepancy at six hours, possibly due to increased cell death. If we now turn
to look at single cell expression dynamics in the populations of in silico-dissected tailbud progenitors, the population-level model predicts, in agreement with the model of the generalised
cell, that a bi-modal distribution will emerge reflecting the fact that some cells differentiate (upregulate tbx24 and down-regulatetbx16), namely those that have been exposed to FGF levels
above the threshold, while others don’t (do not up-regulate tbx24 and maintain tbx16), namely
those that haven’t been exposed to the minimum FGF threshold, and that those that do differentiate will do so synchronously (Figure 3I; 3K). This same synchronous differentiation was
observed experimentally when cells were imaged individually using HCR (Figure 3J; 3L; 3N;
3O). The non-differentiating cells which do not up regulate tbx24 remain high in tbxta, and
do not express the ectodermal marker (keratin18) (Figure 3O). Taken together, these results
show that PSM specification is already established within the posterior progenitor domain and
that differentiation takes place synchronously for all the cells over a defined time-period of 4-6
hours. These in vitro gene expression dynamics differ starkly from the range of differentiation
time scales that we described in vivo (Figure 1N-P; 2A-B), suggesting that an additional layer
of regulation must exist to slow down the differentiation of cells remaining in the progenitor domain. As morphogenesis is notoriously missing from our in vitro set up, we reasoned that cell
movements themselves may be responsible for tuning the dynamics of FGF exposure, hence
controlling the onset of TBox expression.
We hypothesised that the cell movements driving PSM elongation might themselves regulate when cells surpass the minimal FGF threshold required for differentiation - thereby creating
a feedback between tissue morphogenesis and gene regulatory networks from which pattern at
the tissue level could emerge. To explore this idea, we next aimed to determine how our GRN
model would predict Tbox gene expression when simulated in the real morphogenetic context
of PSM developement. We generated 3D cell tracking datasets in which the movements of individual cells within PSM are followed for three hours (Figure 4A). Using multi-photon imaging,
the tracks of single cells could be generated using automatic nuclei tracking, with a track ac-

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 3: Single progenitor cells in vitro differentiate synchronously. Cells of the posterior 25% of the zebrafish PSM were explanted and, using bulk qPCR were demonstrated not
to upregulate (A) Wnt or (B) FGF signalling as measured by axin2 and sprouty4 expression.
(Continues on the next page).

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 3: (From the previous page.) Values compared to explanted, non-dissociated tailbud
(TB). This was also demonstrated by staining for (C) gfp mRNA on the 7XTCF::GFP reporter (D) or antibody staining using ppERK. Explants were (E) labelled using photoconvertible
KikumeGR and explanted then reimaged, demonstrating the majority of the explant comes from
the posterior 25% of the PSM. Staining this region using HCR and segmenting out individual
nuclei (F) confirms the majority of cells contain high levels of nuclear tbx16 transcripts and low
tbx24 transcripts. (G) Simulation of culture of these cells given signalling dynamics given by
their initial position within the embryo, and maintained throughout culture predicts an increase
in expression in tbx24 over time. This prediction is confirmed (H) by bulk qPCR analysis of
isolated single cells in vitro. (I) Plotting the spread of predicted expression levels from single
cells predicts down regulation of tbx16 and (K) an increase in tbx24 expression, forming two
populations with high and low expression. These predictions are tested in vitro and confirmed
to result in a (J) reduction in tbx16 and (L) an increase in tbx24 over time. We observe a population expressing high tbx24 and low tbx24 at the final timepoint. Example images of fixed
cells at each timepoint showing (M) signal activity and (N) TBox trascription factor expression.
(O) Cells were classified as progenitors if they expressed tbx16, tbxta or both, as tbx24 positive,
as keratin18 expressing epidermis or other. Dead cells were classified based on observation
of nuclear shape. Over the time-course, the proportion of progenitor cells decreased, with an
increase in tbx24 positive cells. (O) proportions taken from three independent experiments with
a minimum of 174 cells per experiment. Progenitor defined as a cell expressing tbx16 and/or
tbxta.
curacy of approximately 80% (Supplementary Movie 6 & 7). In this time, three somites were
formed. We extracted cell tracking data from only the unsegmented PSM and at each time-point
normalised the PSM length, removing each new somite as it is formed. We projected the Wnt
and FGF signalling profiles measured from fixed embryos (Figure 1J; Supplementary Movie 8)
onto the tracks. Thus each cell in the simulation continually updates its signal input depending
on position within the tissue, and uses this input to simulate TBox gene expression at the next
time-point (Figure 4B-C; Figure S3). We name this framework ‘Live Modelling’, since it simulates GRNs on cell tracking data obtained from live-imaging. Unlike what we observe in the in
vitro simulations, live modelling simulations do not predict the bi-modal and synchronous differentiation of progenitor cells, which would lead to a tbx24 expression domain starting at 11%
posterior-anterior position (where the FGF threshold is positioned in the embryo) and reaching
the anterior of the PSM. Instead, live-modelling recapitulates the asynchronous differentiation
of the progenitors observed in vivo, and shows that it is required for correct patterning at the
level of the tissue (Figure 4B). As signalling domains and TBox transcription factor expression domains were demonstrated to accurately scale during axial elongation (Figure S1E-F) we
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

were able to project the same signalling domains onto multiphoton movies, taken from different stage embryos. Correct pattern formation was also obtained when different tracks were used
demonstrating that this approach recapitulates TBox gene expression profiles at different stage
embryos, yielding accurate spatial patterning despite subtly different morphogenetic processes
occurring (Figure S3).
When following the output of live modelling simulations over time (Figure 4B-C; Figure
S3; Supplementary Movie 9), we observed two deviations from the mean expression profiles
obtained for TBox gene expression. Firstly, the anterior tbx24 expression did not decline in the
simulations as observed in vivo, likely due to the absence of additional known anterior repressors such as Ripply1 (17) from our model. Secondly, the model predicts that single cells in
the posterior progenitor domain display an increased level of heterogeneity in tbx16 and tbx24
expression compared to the anterior domain (Figure 4C). To assess whether this relates to the
direction of cell movement, we re-sized each point according to cell velocity, as a proxy for
directional movement, with small points representing cells that displace towards the posterior,
and large points those that displace in the anterior direction (Figure 4D-E). This reveals a correlation between heterogeneous TBox expression with an increased posterior displacement, and
suggest that the maintenance of a tbx16/tbx24 boundary is in part a consequence of cells being displaced out of the progenitor domain only once they have passed the threshold of FGF
required for tbx24 expression.
Our model also predicts the existence of an increased level of tbx24 heterogeneity in the
posterior PSM, likely due to the random posterior displacement of cells that have already begun
to differentiate. To identify whether there is indeed a posterior bias of ectopic expression of
tbx24 as predicted by the live modelling, the nuclei within the PSM were segmented (Figure
4F) and then classified as either anterior or posterior relative to the intersection between the
tbx16 and tbx24 expression profiles within each embryo. Following this, cells in each domain
were identified which had aberrant gene expression, defined as expressing tbx24 in the posterior,
or tbx16 in the anterior domain. The frequency of aberrant gene expression was measured and
confirmed a posterior bias in erroneous gene expression, as predicted by the live modelling

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 4: Live modelling couples gene regulatory networks to morphogenesis. (A) Live
imaging of the zebrafish PSM over the period of 2.5 hours using two-photon microscopy with
a 150 second time step allows cell tracking of individual cells within the PSM. These tracks are
used (B) to model the PSM GRN on by cells reading in their levels of FGF and Wnt signalling
at each time point. (Caption continues on the next page.)

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 4: (From the previous page.) Using these signal inputs, each cell predicts its transcription factor gene expression profile given by the colour map. This is quantified (C) by maximum
projection with each cell positioned along a normalised PSM axis. This demonstrates good
correlation between the predicted pattern (points and dotted trend line) and measured in vivo
values shown by the solid line. Solid bar represents position along the PSM where tbx16 expression is less than tbx24 expression on average. (D) Deviation from the in vivo trend line is
observed in the posterior and correlation between cell movement direction and gene expression
state demonstrates posteriorly moving cells are more prone to aberrant gene expression. Large
points correlate with highly posterior to anterior movement of cells. (E-G) These aberrant cells
can be observed in vivo, with more erroneous gene expression identified in the posterior than
the anterior. Bars in (G) represent mean number of aberrant cells in each domain from five
embryos. Boundary between anterior and posterior define per embryo, where tbx16 expression
exceeds tbx24 as measured in Figure 1C.
(Figure 4G).
Taken together we propose a mechanism whereby dynamic signalling driven by cell movements in the mesoderm progenitors tunes the timing of differentiation onset in single cells,
leading to the emergence of well-defined gene expression domains along the PSM while at
the same time maintaining the undifferentiated progenitor pool. In this way, our work reveals
a previously unappreciated generative role of cell movements in pattern emergence, showing
that signalling cues are coupled to cell-intrinsic GRNs by the process of morphogenesis itself.
In addition, we propose that the fluid-to-solid transition (8) might be responsible for the observed heterogeneity in the progenitor domain, causing a minority of differentiated cells to be
transiently pushed backwards as the PSM solidifies. Therefore, tissue morphogenesis acts as
a direct regulator of pattern formation, both in terms of enabling coordinated differentiation
towards the anterior, as well as generating the observed gene expression heterogeneity within
posterior progenitors. This heterogeneity might play a role in the maintenance of uncommitted
progenitors, or as our work seems to suggest, might not be functional.
Across the presomitic mesoderm (PSM), a posterior to anterior gradient of FGF has been
demonstrated to coordinate the spatiotemporal organisation of PSM cells into somites in the anterior, by interactions with Notch Signalling (16, 18–21). In addition to this, FGF has also been
demonstrated to regulate the early EMT process which generates the mesenchymal population
of progenitor cells within the posterior of the PSM. This mesenchyme has also been demonstrated to be responsible for elongating the embryonic axis (3, 7). Finally FGF signalling has
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

been demonstrated to regulate cell fate decisions of mesodermal progenitor cells (3, 12). FGF
is therefore able to regulate cell movements, tissue morphogenesis and also cell fate decisions,
however how one signal is able to be accurately interpreted in such a variety of ways within a
single tissue remains unclear. Our model proposes that the function of FGF in regulating PSM
differentiation may be limited only to the posterior most region of the PSM, perhaps allowing
for a spatial compartmentalisation of its function to allow for multiple different cell responses
to a single signalling profile. Alternatively, single cell dynamic profiles of FGF pathway activity may be essential for providing more precise interpretation to control multiple aspects of
cell function (22) . Further work is required to incorporate precise spatial manipulation of FGF
activity across the PSM, within the context of simultaneously monitoring the impact on cell
movements through the use of Live Modelling approaches.
The observation that cells in vitro differentiate simultaneously is highly reminiscent of the
differentiation of stem cells when responding to external signal sources in culture. Here too,
cells often undergo direct differentiation, without experiencing the range of dynamic differentiation profiles that we have seen are required to generate gene expression patterns within
a 3D morphogenetic context. Our results provide insight into the manner in which the cell
movements of morphogenesis themselves control the temporal regulation of differentiation, via
displacing cells relative to the sources or sinks of extracellular signals. Such a mechanism represents an example of downward causation (23) (information flow from the tissue to the single
cell level i.e. in the global rate of tissue morphogenesis and accompanying cell rearrangements)
and illustrates its central role patterning the embryo. Further investigation will be key in order to improve our understanding of how gene expression patterns emerge within developing
multi-cellular systems, and will help identify which control parameters, at various levels of biological organisation, must be modified and how in order to reliably bioengineer organoids for
therapeutic applications.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dillan Saunders and Meagan Hennessy for feedback on this manuscript.
We would like to thank the Steven Wilson lab for sharing the Tg(7xTCF-Xla.Sia:GFP), used
here as 7XTCF::GFP reporter. Thanks to the Cambridge Advanced Imaging Centre (CAIC) for
imaging support. T.F., S.H. and B.S. are supported by a Henry Dale Fellowship jointly funded
by the Wellcome Trust and the Royal Society (109408/Z/15/Z) and T.F. by a scholarship from
the Cambridge Trust, University of Cambridge. L.T. is supported by a scholarship from the
BBSRC. Y.W. is supported by a summer vacation stipend from St Catharine’s College, University of Cambridge. B.C. is supported by a Stipend from the Bedford Fund, King’s College,
University of Cambridge and a scholarship from the Wellcome Trust. B.V. was supported by a
Herschel Smith Postdoctoral Fellowship, University of Cambridge and Department of Zoology,
University of Oxford.

Methods
Animal Husbandry
This research was regulated under the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 Amendment
Regulations 2012 following ethical review by the University of Cambridge Animal Welfare
and Ethical Review Body (AWERB). Embryos were obtained and raised in standard E3 media
at 28◦ C. Wild Type lines are either Tüpfel Long Fin (TL), AB or AB/TL. The Tg(7xTCFXla.Sia:GFP) reporter line (6) was provided by the Steven Wilson laboratory. Embryos were
staged as in (24)

Primary Culture of Tailbud Progenitor Cells
Cells were explanted from the tailbud as in (16). Effort was made to remove the ectoderm prior
to dissection. Cells were dissected in calcium and magnesium free PBS in order to promote cell
dissociation. Cells were cultures in 8 well Ibidi Micro-Slides under the fully defined L15 media
supplemented with PenStrep solution to limit bacterial growth.
RNA extractions were made in triplicate, from independent experiments, using Trizol Reagent
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(Ambion LifeTechnologies) following a standard protocol and reverse transcription using Superscript III (Invitrogen). Resultant cDNA was quantified using SYBRGreen with liquid handling robot (Qiagility, Qiagen) and analysed on a RotorGeneQ thermocycler (Qiagen). Primer
sequences: axin2 5’-TACCCTCGGACACTTCAAGG-3’ and 5’-TGCCCTCATACATTGGCAGA3’; sprouty4 5’-CACGCGCCCTAGTATCAAAC-3’ and 5’-GGGATCTTGGTGAAGTGTGC3’; EF1a 5’-GGAGACTGGTGTCCTCAA-3’ and 5’-GGTGCATCTCAACAGACTT-3’. Concentration of cDNA was estimated using an in-house MAK2 analysis method, as described
previously (25).

In Situ Hybridisation Chain Reaction (HCR)
Embryos were raised to the required stage then fixed in 4% PFA in DEPC treated PBS without
calcium and magnesium at 4◦ C overnight. Embryos were then stained using HCR following
the standard zebrafish protocol found in (26). Probes, fluorescent hairpins and buffers were all
purchased from Molecular Instruments. After staining, samples were counterstained with DAPI
and mounted under 80% glycerol.

Immunohistochemistry
Embryos were raised to the required stage then fixed in 4% PFA in DEPC treated PBS without
calcium and magnesium at 4◦ C overnight. Embryos were then blocked in 3% goat serum in
0.25% Triton, 1% DMSO, in PBS for one hour at room temperature. Diphosphorylated ERK
was detected using the primary antibody (M9692-200UL, Sigma) diluted 1 in 500 in 3% goat
serum in 0.25% Triton, 1% DMSO, in PBS. The samples were incubated at 4◦ C overnight then
washed in 0.25% Triton, 1% DMSO, in PBS. Secondary Alexa 647nm conjugated antibodies
were diluted 1 in 500 in 3% goat serum in 0.25% Triton, 1% DMSO, 1X DAPI in PBS and
applied overnight at 4◦ C.

Imaging and Image Analysis
Samples were imaged using a Zeiss LSM700 inverted confocal at 12 bit, 20X or 40X magnification, with an image resolution of 512x512 pixels. Single cell HCR was imaged using a Nikon
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Ti inverted widefield microscope at 63X magnification.
Image analysis of confocal images was done using the line drawing tool on Fiji (27, 28) set
to a width of 50 pixels. Lines were drawn following the curve of the embryo, through the centre
of the PSM from posterior PSM to the posterior most clear somite boundary. Profiles were
normalised to the length of the PSM and signal intensity as individual embryos by dividing the
measured value by the maximum value of that embryo.
Nuclear segmentation of whole embryos stained using HCR was conducted using a tight
mask applied around the DAPI stain using Imaris (Bitplane) with a surface detail of 0.5µm.
Touching surfaces were split using a seed size of 4µm. Values were exported as X, Y, Z coordinates relative to the posteriormost tip of the PSM where X, Y, Z were equal to (0, 0, 0). The
PSM was then segmented by hand by deleting nuclear surfaces outside of the PSM, including
notochord, spinal cord, anterior somites and ectoderm. Only the PSM closest to the imaging
objective, therefore of highest imaging quality was measured with the distal PSM also removed.
Intensity mean values of each transcription factor HCR signal were exported and normalised
between 0 and 1 by dividing each cell’s mean signal intensity by the maximum measured within
that sample, per gene. PSM length was normalised individually between 0 and 1 by division of
the position in X by the maximum X value measured in each embryo.
Single cell image analysis was conducted using Imaris (Bitplane) by generating loose surface masks around the DAPI stain to capture the full nuclear region and a small region of cytoplasm. Surface masks were then filtered to remove any masks where two cells joined together or
small surfaces caused by background noise, or fragmented apoptotic nuclei. The intensity sum
of each channel was measured and normalised by the area of the surface, as surface area and
transcript intensity had been demonstrated to correlate. Expression level was then normalised
between 0 and 1 using the maximum value measured for each gene, in each experiment.
Live imaging datasets of the developing PSM was created using a TriM Scope II Upright
2-photon scanning fluorescence microscope equipped Insight DeepSee dual-line laser (tunable
710-1300 nm fixed 1040 nm line). Embryo was imaged with a 25X 1.05 NA water dipping
objective. Time step and frame number as per figure legend. Embryos laterally in low melting

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

agarose with the entire tail cut free to permit normal development (29).

Model formulation
We formulated the Tbox gene regulatory network using a dynamical systems formulation. The
models aim is to recapitulate the dynamics of Tbox gene expression for any cell, or rather
a general cell, in the developing zebrafish PSM. We use a connectionist model formulation
previosly used to model other developmental patterning processes (30).
The mRNA concentrations encoded by the Tbox genes tbxta, tbx16 and tbx24 are represented by the state variables of the dynamical system. For each gene, the concentration of its
associated mRNA a at time t is given by g a (t). mRNA concentration over time is governed by
the following system of three coupled ordinary differential equations:
dg a (t)
= Ra φ(ua ) − λa g a (t)
dt

(1)

where Ra and λa respectively represent the rates of mRNA production and decay. φ is a sigmoid
regulation-expression function used to represent the cooperative, saturating, coarse-grained kinetics of transcriptional regulation and introduces non-linearities into the model that enable it
to exhibit complex behaviours:
ua
1
q
+1 ,
φ(u ) =
2
(ua )2 + 1
a





(2)

where
ua =

X

W ba g b (t) +

X

E sa g s (t) + ha .

(3)

s∈S

b∈G

G = {tbxta, tbx16 , tbx24 } is the set of Tbox genes while S = {Wnt, FGF} is the set of
external regulatory inputs provided by the Wnt and FGF signalling environments. The concentrations of the external regulators g s are interpolated from quantified spatial mRNA expression
data (Figure 1J) and translated into time as explained in the main text to used as dynamic inputs
to the model. Changing Wnt and FGF concentrations over time renders the parameter term
P

E sa g s (t) time-dependent and therefore the model non-autonomous (14, 15).

s∈S

The interconnectivity matrices W and E house the parameters representing the regulatory
interactions among the TBox genes, and from Wnt and FGF to the Tbox genes, respectively.
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Matrix elements wba and esa are the parameters representing the effect of regulator b or s on
target gene a. These can be positive (representing an activation from b or s onto a), negative
(repression), or close to zero (no interaction). ha is a threshold parameter representing the
basal activity of gene a, which acknowledges the presence of regulators absent from our model.
Model parameters are detailed in Table S1.

Model fitting and selection
We reverse-engineered values for parameters Ra , λa , W , E, and ha by fitting the model to
the inferred gene expression dynamics of a cell that took 6 hours to enter a somite from an
initial progenitor state. Priors were set on 4 of the parameters: parameters representing autoactivations must be positive as should be the parameter representing the regulation of tbxta
from Wnt, to accommodate the ample evidence supporting the nature of this interaction in the
literature (4). No other constraints were imposed on the parameters.
Markov Chain Monte Carlo was used to infer the parameter values that best recapitulated
the experimental data. We used the emcee package for Python and ran the fitting algorithm
independently 100 times. Each run returned an estimated ’best’ a parameter set. The 100
parameter values were then simulated, compared to the data and re-simulated for cells that took
3, 4 and 5 hours respectively to undergo differentiation across the PSM from a progenitor state.
Of the 100 initial networks, 56 recapitulated accurately the gene expression dynamics all the
different scenarios.
We selected a network for our analysis by further imposing the sign of three interactions
which are strongly supported by the literature. These are the activation of tbx24 by Tbx16
(2, 12), the activation of tbx16 by FGF (3, 13) and finally the inhibition of tbx24 by Wnt (12)
. These interactions weren’t initially imposed as priors in order to not further bias the fitting,
but were introduced at this stage to help with model selection to avoid choosing a network
with interactions that might be knowingly wrong in sign. It is well known that networks with
different topologies are often able to generate the same dynamics (31), making it difficult to
differentiate between models without the aid of further evidence.
Out of these 56 networks, only one satisfied these three conditions imposed a posteriori:
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

network 11. In order to investigate how similar and therefore representative C11 is compared
to the other 56 networks we used clustering of the 56 networks (Figure S2) demonstrating that
they do not cluster well, and in fact are all broadly similar to one another.

Model analysis
The gene regulatory network model was formulated as a system of coupled ordinary equations.
As such, it is amenable be analysed using the established tools and concepts from dynamical
systems theory which we use to elucidate the mechanisms driving the observed dynamics (31)
In addition, our system is rendered non-autonomous by the changing signalling Wnt and FGF
environments, which we accommodate by calculating instantaneous phase portraits (14, 15).

Live modelling framework
In brief, our live-modelling framework simulates the gene regulatory network previously inferred from static tissue level expression pattern quantifications on every cell in the tracks,
updating Wnt and FGF values dynamically as the cells’ positions changes during PSM morphogenesis.
Cell tracks spanning four somite stages were obtained from live-imaging a developing zebrafish PSM using a multiphoton microscope. The position of each cell in the PSM was
recorded in 3D space as an (x, y, z) coordinate every 2.5 minutes. The coordinate system
was such that the origin (0,0,0) was set at the posterior-most tip of the PSM. The positive x-axis
runs in the posterior to anterior direction through the middle of the PSM, the positive y-axis runs
from centre to dorsal PSM and the positive z-axis, from centre to lateral PSM. The raw tracking
data were manually modified to terminate tracks once these had entered a newly formed somite
so that our dataset would only contain the tracks of cells within the PSM. Newly formed somites
can be identified in the tracks by eye as soon as their posterior boundary forms.
The simulations are initialised using the same TBox gene expression and signalling profiles
(Figure 1C; 1J) that were used to fit the gene regulatory network model. At the first time point,
Tbox expression profiles (Figure 1C) are projected onto the normalised length of the PSM, and
cells are assigned tbxta, tbx16 and tbx24 values according to their posterior to anterior position
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(x-axis). These values will be used as the initial conditions from which to simulate the gene
regulatory network model in every cell. The same methodology is used to assign each cell with
initial Wnt and FGF values.
The model is allowed to run in every cell for the duration between time points in the tracks
using the Wnt and FGF values previously assigned. At the next time point, the position of the
cell is updated to the tracking data. The new length of the PSM is again normalised, signalling
profiles are the projected onto the newly normalised PSM and cells will update their Wnt and
FGF values again according to their new relative positions in the PSM. The model will run
again simulating the time between tracking time points using the last simulated tbxta, tbx16 and
tbx24 values as the initial conditions and the recently updated values for Wnt and FGF. This will
be done iteratively until the last tracking time point. Cells which appear between time points,
following cell division or a new track for example, are initialised in the same way cells were at
the first time point.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

References
1. J. Briscoe, S. Small, Development 142, 3996 (2015).
2. C. M. Bouldin, et al., Development 142, 2499 (2015).
3. H. Goto, S. C. Kimmey, R. H. Row, D. Q. Matus, B. L. Martin, Development 144, 1412
(2017).
4. B. L. Martin, D. Kimelman, Developmental cell 15, 121 (2008).
5. O. F. Venzin, A. C. Oates, Developmental biology 460, 40 (2020).
6. E. Moro, et al., Developmental Biology 366, 327 (2012).
7. B. Bénazéraf, et al., Nature 466, 248 (2010).
8. A. Mongera, et al., Nature 561, 1 (2018).
9. I. Ridelis, et al., FEBS Letters 586, 784 (2012).
10. H. Tsutsui, S. Karasawa, H. Shimizu, N. Nukina, A. Miyawaki, EMBO reports 6, 233
(2005).
11. S. Habuchi, H. Tsutsui, A. B. Kochaniak, A. Miyawaki, A. M. van Oijen, PLoS ONE 3,
e3944 (2008).
12. R. Fior, et al., Development (Cambridge, England) 129, 3311 (2012).
13. K. Griffin, S. Amacher, C. Kimmel, D. Kimelman, Development 122, 4119 (1998).
14. J. R. Collier, N. A. Monk, P. K. Maini, J. H. Lewis, Journal of theoretical Biology 183, 429
(1996).
15. B. Verd, A. Crombach, J. Jaeger, BMC systems biology 8, 1 (2014).
16. A. B. Webb, et al., eLife 5, e08438 (2016).
17. A. Kawamura, et al., Developmental Cell 9, 735 (2005).
24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.05.429898; this version posted February 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

18. A. Goldbeter, O. Pourquié, Journal of Theoretical Biology 252, 574 (2008).
19. J. Dubrulle, M. J. McGrew, O. Pourquié, Cell 106, 219 (2001).
20. S. A. Holley, H. Takeda, Seminars in Cell Developmental Biology 13, 481 (2002).
21. A. Aulehla, O. Pourquié, Current Opinion in Cell Biology 20, 632 (2008).
22. A. De Simone, et al., Nature 590, 129 (2021).
23. L. Busby, B. Steventon, Preprints (2020).
24. C. B. Kimmel, W. W. Ballard, S. R. Kimmel, B. Ullmann, T. F. Schilling, Developmental
Dynamics 203, 253 (1995).
25. D. a. Turner, et al., Development 141, 4243 (2014).
26. H. M. Choi, et al., Development (Cambridge) 145 (2018).
27. J. Schindelin, et al., Nature Methods 9, 676 (2012).
28. C. a. Schneider, W. S. Rasband, K. W. Eliceiri, Nature Methods 9, 671 (2012).
29. E. Hirsinger, B. Steventon, Journal of Visualized Experiments 2017, e55210 (2017).
30. E. Mjolsness, D. H. Sharp, J. Reinitz, Journal of theoretical Biology 152, 429 (1991).
31. S. H. Strogatz, Nonlinear dynamics and chaos with student solutions manual: With applications to physics, biology, chemistry, and engineering (CRC press, 2018).

25

