bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Covid-19 pandemic and the unprecedented mobilisation of scholarly efforts prompted by
a health crisis: Scientometric comparisons across SARS, MERS and 2019-nCov literature

Milad Haghani, Michiel C. J. Bliemer
The University of Sydney Business School, NSW, Australia

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
During the current century, each major coronavirus outbreak has triggered a quick and
immediate surge of academic publications on this topic. The spike in research publications
following the 2019 Novel Coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak, however, has been like no other.
The global crisis caused by the Covid-19 pandemic has mobilised scientific efforts in an
unprecedented way. In less than five months, more than 12,000 research items have been
indexed while the number increasing every day. With the crisis affecting all aspects of life,
research on Covid-19 seems to have become a focal point of interest across many academic
disciplines. Here, scientometric aspects of the Covid-19 literature are analysed and contrasted
with those of the two previous major Coronavirus diseases, i.e. Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS). The focus is on the cooccurrence of key-terms, bibliographic coupling and citation relations of journals and
collaborations between countries. Certain recurring patterns across all three literatures were
discovered. All three outbreaks have commonly generated three distinct and major cohort of
studies: (i) studies linked to the public health response and epidemic control, (ii) studies
associated with the chemical constitution of the virus and (iii) studies related to treatment,
vaccine and clinical care. While studies affiliated with the category (i) seem to have been the
first to emerge, they overall received least numbers of citations compared to those of the two
other categories. Covid-19 studies seem to have been distributed across a broader variety of
journals and subject areas. Clear links are observed between the geographical origins of each
outbreak or the local geographical severity of each outbreak and the magnitude of research
originated from regions. Covid-19 studies also display the involvement of authors from a
broader variety of countries compared to SARS and MRS.
Keywords: Scientometrics; bibliometrics; research synthesis; Coronaviruses

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1. Introduction
On December 31, 2019 an official case of a novel respiratory diseases of the category of
Coronaviruses, named Covid-19, was reported in Wuhan, China, marking the beginning of
what proved to be one of the direst and most devastating viral outbreaks in the modern history
(Sohrabi et al. 2020, Wang et al. 2020). This was immediately followed by an unprecedented
and swift response of the academic community to address various dimensions of this health
crisis and prompted an avalanche of scholarly publications on this topic (Golinelli et al. 2020,
Haghani et al. 2020, Kagan et al. 2020). In less than five months, more than 12,000 publications
on this topic have already been indexed by Scopus with the number increasing figuratively
every day in considerable increments (Torres-Salinas et al. 2020). And this figure does not
even include many more publications available in various repositories, including CORD-19
(Colavizza et al. 2020), in the form of preprints awaiting peer review by their respective
journals. Such explosion of research on a single topic and the off-the-charts surge in the rate of
publications are arguably unprecedented trends in the history of scholarly publications. An
article published by Science on May 13, 2020, referred to this phenomenon as one that is
“among the biggest explosions of scientific literature ever” (Brainard 2020). It highlighted
how, in the face of this phenomenon, it has become extremely challenging for scientists to stay
abreast of the latest developments. This has made the importance of research synthesis more
tangible than ever and has even resulted in the development of several computational research
mining tools for this very topic utilising methods such as Artificial Intelligence (AI). Among
such efforts is a research synthesis powered by AI algorithms which has harvested datapoints
from a large number the CORD-19 articles and categorised them (Brainard 2020).
Though the impact of the Covid-19 health crisis has marked it as a rather unique milestone in
the history disease outbreaks, the world, prior to this, was not a stranger with Coronavirus
disease outbreaks (McIntosh 1974, Myint 1994, Cavanagh 2005, Lim et al. 2016, Chen et al.
2020). Prior to 2020, two major outbreaks of this family of viruses had already been reported
with at least one of them carrying the official label of a “global pandemic” (Wang et al. 2020).
On November 16, 2002, the first case of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)
disease was reported in the Guangdong province in southern China, which by 2003, swiftly
spread from continent to continent, prompting the World Health Organisation to declare it as a
pandemic. In fact, SARS is known to be “the First Pandemic of the 21st Century” (Cherry and
Krogstad 2004). Nearly ten years later, on June 13, 2012, the first case of the Middle Eastern
Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) disease was discovered in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. These two
constituted the two most major Coronavirus outbreaks until Covid-19 came along. Similar to
Covid-19, though at a much smaller scale, each of these previous outbreaks generated a
literature of their own (Kostoff and Morse 2011).
In the face of the flood of scholarly outputs on Covid-19, and along with the conventional
review and research synthesis studies (Chang et al. 2020, Chen et al. 2020, Cortegiani et al.
2020), scientometric (Colavizza et al. 2020) and bibliometric methods (Bonilla-Aldana et al.
2020, Hossain 2020) have also gained traction in documenting and analysing the rapid
developments of this literature (Chahrour et al. 2020, Dehghanbanadaki et al. 2020, Haghani
et al. 2020, Kumar 2020, Le Bras et al. 2020). Here in this work, the literatures of these three
major Coronavirus diseases are disentangled and analysed in a comparative way and from

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

scientometric perspectives. The aim is to discover possible similarities and discrepancies across
these three segments of the Coronavirus literature, and to discover whether there are recurring
patterns in terms of magnitude, temporal evolution and the shape of these three literatures that
were each developed in response to a disease outbreak. The main focus of the analyses is on
keyword co-occurrences, bibliographic coupling and citation relations of sources and
collaborations between countries.
2. Methods, data and general statistics
To compare the scientometric aspects of the studies on SARS, MERS and Covid-19, three
separate datasets of publications on these three topics were retrieved from Scopus through three
separate search strategies. The decision on which general database to use (e.g. Web of Science
(WoS) or Scopus) was mainly made based on the number of indexed Covid-19 studies as the
sector of the literature that is currently emerging (compared to the literatures on SARS and
MERS that are better established). At the time of the data retrieval, WoS had indexed slightly
less than 5,000 research items on Covid-19, while the number of items in Scopus neared
12,000. Given the fact that the Scopus database was considerably more up to date in that area,
this database was set as the main source of data extraction in this work. Therefore, for the sake
of consistency, the data for SARS and MERS were also extracted from Scopus.
The search strategies were devised in a way to minimise the possible overlap between the
datasets on SARS, MERS and Covid-19 and to disentangle the three datasets to the most
possible extent. Preliminary inspection of the literature on each three topics determined a set
of distinct keywords that would return the target literature with reasonable specificity and
sensitivity. In each search, key terms associated with the other literatures were combined with
the logical operator “AND NOT” in order to avoid the overlap. The lower bound of the time
span for each search was set with consideration of the year where the first outbreak of each
virus took place. The query string associated with each dataset are as follows:
SARS: ( TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ( ( "Severe acute respiratory syndrome" OR "SARS" ) AND (
coronavirus* ) ) OR ( "SARS virus" OR "SARS disease" OR "Severe acute respiratory
syndrome disease" OR "Severe acute respiratory syndrome virus" OR "SARS-Cov") ) AND
NOT TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ( "covid" OR "nCov" OR "Covid-19" OR "covid19" OR "SARS-Cov2" OR "Severe acute respiratory syndrome-2" OR "MERS" OR "middle east respiratory
syndrome" ) ) ) AND PUBYEAR > 2001
MERS: ( TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ( ( "Middle east respiratory syndrome" OR "MERS" ) AND (
coronavirus ) ) OR ( "MERS-Cov" OR "MERS virus" OR "MERS disease" OR "Middle
east respiratory syndrome virus" OR "Middle east respiratory syndrome disease" ) ) AND
NOT TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ( "nCov" OR "Covid-19" OR "covid19" OR "SARS-Cov" OR
"SARS-Cov-2" OR "SARS" OR "Severe acute respiratory syndrome" ) ) ) AND PUBYEAR
> 2011
Covid-19: TITLE-ABS-KEY ( "covid-19" OR "covid19" OR "coronavirus disease 2019"
OR "2019-nCov" OR "Novel Coronavirus" OR "Novel Corona virus" OR "SARS-Cov-2"
) AND PUBYEAR > 2018

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The search was last time updated on 24 May 2020 where it returned 5,907 items on SARS,
1,752 items on MERS and 11,859 items on Covid-19. Figures 1, 2 and 3 show the distribution
of the studies on SARS, MERS and Covid-19, respectively, across subject areas. Figure 4(a)
also shows the composition of the Covid-19 literature in terms of the document types,
demonstrating that only nearly 50% of the studies on this topic have so far been in the form of
full-length articles, while letters, notes, reviews, and other document formats constitute a large
portion (i.e. nearly half) of the literature on this topic at the time of this investigation.
Full records of the three datasets on SARS, MERS and Covid-19 were retrieved in CSV Excel
format from Scopus, all on the same day. This included the citation information, bibliographic
information, abstract and keywords, funding details and the references. The Scopus restriction
of maximum 2,000 document to export posed challenges for the retrieval of the SARS and
Covid-19 datasets whose size were bigger than 2,000 documents. For the SARS dataset, the
challenge was circumvented by further limiting the search to specific year(s), in separate
bundles, in a way that the size of each bundle was less than 2,000 items, therefore allowing us
to export the items of each bundle separately. The extraction of the Covid-19 dataset, however,
posed a further layer of complication, given that nearly all studies of Covid-19 have been
published in one year, i.e. 2020. Therefore, the year of publication could not be used as a
criterion to form a set of mutually exclusive smaller-size exportable bundles for this literature.
To decompose the search outcome to bundles of 2,000 documents or less, the following
strategy was adopted. The Document Type was used to initially limit the search to mutually
exclusive (non-overlapping) categories. First, the search was limited to “Review or Short
Survey or Erratum or Conference Paper or Data paper”. This formed a set of 1,267 documents
which was extracted in one single export (see Figure 4(a) for details of the number of items
within each Document Type category). Subsequently, the search was set back to original and
was limited to Notes (1,067 items) and then to Editorial (1,270 items). With each set of these
two subsets being smaller than 2,000, they were exported separately. There were 2,564
documents of Letter type. This set was further decomposed to two mutually exclusive subsets
based on the Publication Stage criterion (1,539 Article in Press, and 1,025 Final) and was
retrieved in two separate exports. For the remaining 5,691 Article documents, the following
strategy was devised. Of the 5,691 items, 2,944 were Article in Press and 2,747 were Final.
First, the 2,944 Article in Press items were considered. The list of those studies was sorted as
First Author (A-Z) and the first 2,000 items were extracted in one export. Then the list was
sorted as First Author (Z-A) and the first 944 items were exported. Similar strategy was utilised
to extract the remaining 2,747 Final documents.
A supplementary search was also conducted on the general topic of coronaviruses using the
string TITLE-ABS-KEY ( "Coronavirus*" ) AND PUBYEAR > 1985 which returned 24,620
documents on the same day. Only the data related to the number of documents by year was
extracted for this search.
Figure 4(b) shows the temporal distribution of the studies on the general topic of
Coronaviruses. The graph clearly shows spikes of publication coinciding with the years when
SARS, MERS and Covid-19 outbreaks took place. The first spike is related to the SARS
outbreak in 2002 which is reflected in an immediate and substantial increase in the number of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

publications on Coronaviruses from 2002 to 2003. The increase continued, though at a slower
rate, to 2004 and was then followed by a gradual decline till 2012. The 2012 MERS outbreak
triggered another spike in the number of publications on Coronaviruses, though not as large as
that of the SARS. The intensification of attention to this topic this time lasted for about three
years till 2015 before another decline began. The spike of Coronavirus studies prompted by the
Covid-19 outbreak, however, seem to have been occurring at a completely different scale which
can be deemed unprecedented in the history of Coronavirus studies. The number of studies
emerged in the first five months of 2020 nears an equivalent of the 70% of the total sizer of
Coronavirus literature during more than 50 years (1968-2019). In Figure 4(c), the temporal
distribution of the SARS, MERS and Covid-19 studies have been shown separately according
to the three datasets explained earlier. Note that, the quantities associated with SARS and
MERS are represented by the left vertical axis whereas that of the Covid-19 is represented by
the right vertical axis, with a scale ten times bigger than the scale of the left axis.
The history of previous Coronavirus research has suggested that the number of studies will
likely keep rising for at least a few years before it peaks. But given the unprecedented
magnitude of research and the explosive rate of publications since the begging of 2020, it would
be interesting to observe whether this pattern would repeat itself and whether the peak would
occur at an earlier or later stage compared to those of the previous outbreaks, a question whose
answer will only be determined by time.

Figure 1 Distribution of SARS studies across Subject Areas.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2 Distribution of MERS studies across Subject Areas.

Figure 3 Distribution of Covid-19 studies across Subject Areas.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 4 (a) Distribution of Covid-19 studies across Document Types, (b) Temporal distribution of the
number of Coronavirus studies, (c) Temporal distribution of the SARS, MERS and Covid-19 studies.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

3. Keyword co-occurrence analyses
The co-occurrence of keywords associated with the SARS, MERS and Covid-19 literature were
analysed using VOSViewer (Van Eck and Waltman 2010). Each analysis was performed on
the separate set of data associated with the literature of interest. The maps of keyword cooccurrences associated with SARS, MERS and Covid-19 literatures are provided in Figures 5,
6 and 7 respectively. The minimum number of occurrences for the keywords to be included in
the map was set to 5 in all three cases. The unit of analysis has also been set to all keywords
(that includes both author and index keywords) and the method of counting was full counting.
Figures A1 and A2 in the Appendix illustrate the map associated with the SARS literature
overlaid respectively with the average year of publication and average number of citations
associated with the studies where these keywords have occurred. Figure A3 and A4 present the
counterpart outputs for the MERS literature analysis. Figure A5 is a heatmap of Covid-19
keyword co-occurrence and Figure A6 overlays the Covid-19 keywords map in Figure 7 with
the colour-coding of the average number of citations. Given that almost all studies of Covid19 are 2020 items, the colour-coding related to the average publication year was forgone in
regard to this literature. Maps of term occurrences based on the analysis of the title and abstract
of studies on SARS, MERS and Covid-19 have also been presented in Figures 7, 8 and 9
respectively. While the below analysis focuses mainly on the interpretation of the keyword
maps, similar patterns are by-and-large observable through analysis of the title and abstract
terms of these studies.
With respect to each of the three literatures, three distinct clusters of keywords were
identifiable. These clusters showed certain patterns of commonality across the three datasets.
Each map presents a distinct cluster of keywords that seem to be associable to the studies
related to public health emergency management and the prevention of epidemic. This
would be the red cluster in Figure 5 (SARS), the green cluster in Figure 6 (MERS) and the red
cluster in Figure 7. Here, this is referred to as Cluster (i). In this cluster, one can observe terms
such as those associated with general public health including “wold health organisation”,
“public health”, “public health service”, “global health”, as well as those associated with
disease outbreaks including “emergency”, “health risk” “epidemics”, “pandemic”,
“outbreak”, “viral diseases”, “virus infection”, “communicable disease”, “transmission”,
“travel”. Terms representing measures of emergency severity also appear in this cluster
including “mortality”, “fatality”, “morbidity”, “infection risk”. This cluster also includes terms
that are linked to the prediction of disease propagation. These are terms such as
“mathematical model”, “modelling”, “simulation”, “statistical model” and “prediction” that
have commonly occurred in this cluster. The cluster includes terms affiliated with measures of
disease control and spread prevention such as “(social/patient) isolation”, “quarantine”,
“hygiene”, “handwashing”, “prevention”, “infection control”, “(population) surveillance”,
“mass screening”, “(face) mask”, “contact tracing”. The cluster also represents keywords that
attributable to public policy making and social protection such as “health care planning”,
“health care policy”, “health care quality”, “leadership”, “disaster planning”, “polices”.
The Cluster (i) of keywords also have distinctly and commonly across all three datasets
represented keywords that are attributable to the studies on mental health impact of the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

epidemic. These are keywords such as “mental health (service)”, “psychiatry”, “psychology”,
“mental stress”, “anxiety”, “fear”, “mental disease”. These studies have often used methods
such as “questionnaire(s)” and “survey(s)” that have commonly reflected in this Cluster across
the three literatures. Issues surrounding the safety of medical facilities and medical staff also
appear to have been addressed mainly by studies whose keywords are attributable to this
cluster. These studies have generated keywords such as “health care personnel”, “nurse(s)”,
“medical staff”, “hospital”, “health care facility”, “personal protective equipment” that are
distinctly observable in Cluster (i) of keywords across all three datasets.
The economic aspects of the epidemics also seem to have been addressed particularly by
Covid-19 as reflected in Cluster (i) of the Covid-19 literature. These have been reflected in
terms such as “economics”, “economic aspect”, which have occurred frequently enough in
Covid-19 studies for them to appear distinctly on the map. The trace of such cohort of studies
is, however, not as clearly identifiable based on the SARS and MERS maps as is it with respect
to the Covid-19 literature. This could be explained by the greater magnitude of the societal
impact of Covid-19 outbreak compared to SARS and MERS.
The names of the countries and regions have almost invariably appeared in Cluster (i) across
all three datasets. In certain cases, the country names that have occurred most are those from
which the outbreaks originated or those that suffered most from the impact of the outbreak. For
example, “Saudi Arabia” appears quite distinctly on the Cluster (i) of the MERS dataset.
Similarly, the occurrence of the names of south-east Asian countries/regions such as “China”,
“Hong Kong”, “Taiwan”, “Singapore” on the Cluster (i) of the SARS map, or the term
“Wuhan” on the Cluster (i) of the Covid-19 map are quite notable. The occurrence of the name
of the countries also could be a reflection of the early studies with respect to each outbreak that
have addressed the local impacts/spread of the outbreaks on their own society. On the issue of
early studies, the terms “letters”, “editorial”, and “review” (which have intentionally been
kept on the maps) seem to also have distinctly occurred in Cluster (i) of each literature which
is another indication that this cluster includes early studies that appeared at a time where the
amount of data and clinical trials were insufficient for full-length articles. An inspection of the
Figures A1 and A3 does, in fact, confirm this hypothesis at least in association with the SARS
and MERS literature, that the Cluster (i) of keywords represent studies that on average
emerged early during the developments of their respective literatures. Figures A2, A4 and A6
that have illustrated the colour-coding of the average number of citations on the maps also
show that, although Cluster (i) is associated with the early studies that generally predated
studies of the two other clusters and although it represents the largest variety of topics
compared to the two other clusters, it is also associated with studies that, on average, been the
recipient of a lesser number of citations when compared to the two other clusters. This pattern
also appears to have commonly occurred across all three datasets.
A second cluster of keywords associated with each of the three literatures were also discovered
that is attributable to the studies on the chemistry and physiology of the virus, or viral
pathogenesis, or in other words, the chemical constitution of the virus (Knight 1954), a part
of virology that investigates the biological processes and activities of viruses that take place in
infected host cells and result in the replication of a virus. For the SARS map in Figure 5, as

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

well as the Covid-19 map in Figure 7, this would be the green cluster, whereas for the MERS
map (Figure 6), this cluster is red. According to the maps, the most distinct terms associated
with this cohort of virology studies on SARS, MERS and Covid-19 are terms such as “virus
protein”, “virus entry”, “chemistry”, “metabolism”, “physiology”, “pathology”, “cell line”,
“(virus/viral) protein(s)”, “molecular model(s)”, “virus genome”, “virus rna”, “virus
replication”, “mutation”, and “enzyme activity”. As this sector of studies often use “animal
model(s)”, terms such as “animal cell”, “animal experiment”, “controlled study”, “mice” and
“mouse” have frequently appeared in Cluster (ii) associated with each of the three literatures.
In reflection of the fact that these cohort of studies ultimately seek “drug design”, in addition
to generic common terms such as “drug design/potency/structure/synthesis”, the names of the
specific potential drugs that have been investigated in relation to each disease have appeared
in this cluster. This includes terms such as “hydroxychloroquine” or “remdesivir” on the Covid19 map. An inspection of the maps overlaid with the average year of publications for SARS
and MERS in Figures A1 and A3 in the Appendix suggests that, on average, this cohort of
studies are generally the last to emerge in the published domain compared to the two other
major clusters, but they receive relatively high citations on average (according to Figures A2,
A4 and A6).
A third and relatively smaller cluster of keywords was commonly identifiable in relation to
each three literatures. This cluster has been visualised in blue colour across all three maps of
keyword co-occurrence. The studies represented by this cluster of keywords, here referred to
as Cluster (iii), appear to have been more closely focused on the developments of antibodies
and vaccines. The terms “treatment”, “treatment outcome”, “disease severity”, “antiviral
therapy”, “prognosis”, “drug safety”, “prospective/retrospective study”, “immunology”,
“immunotherapy”, “innate immunity”, “immune response”, “virus/viral vaccine(s)”,
“virus/viral antibody” are notable across these studies. Terms affiliated with studies related to
treatments and clinical care of respiratory disease patients also appear in this cluster. This
includes terms such as “artificial ventilation”, “intensive care unit”, as well as symptom and
organ terminologies associated with each disease, terms such as “fever”, “headache”,
“diarrhea”, “lung (injury)”, “coughing”, “liver injury”, “kidney”. Terms affiliated with cohort
analysis studies have appeared in this cluster of the maps associated with each literature. This
is reflected in terms such as “female”, “male”, “child”, “infant”, “young adult”, “adult”, “age”,
“middle aged”, “pregnant”, “pregnancy”. This pattern of the cohort analysis keywords
appearing in Cluster (iii) is particularly common across the MERS and Covid-19 studies. For
SARS, these terms have largely appeared in the red cluster, at the border between the red and
blue clusters.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 5 The map of keyword co-occurrences associated with the SARS literature.

Figure 6 The map of keyword co-occurrences associated with the MERS literature.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 7 The map of keyword co-occurrences associated with the Covid-19 literature.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

4. Bibliographic coupling and citations of journals
Bibliographic coupling of the studies on SARS, MERS and Covid-19 were analysed at the level
of their sources/journals. Figure 8, 9 and 10 show the maps of journal bibliographic coupling
associated with SARS, MERS and Covid-10 literatures respectively. The node sizes are
proportional to the number of documents published by the corresponding sources and the
thickness of the links are proportional to the degree of bibliographic couplings between the
sources connected by each link. The minimum number of documents associated with each
node/journal to appear on the map has been set to 10. No minimum strength was set for links
to be visualised on the map.
A first-glance comparison shows that while the maps associated with SARS and MERS are
well connected, connections across the Covid-19 map are rather sparse. Both the SARS and
MERS maps include three major and distinct clusters of bibliographically coupled journals in
addition to one minor and smaller cluster. These clusters show relatively strong degrees of
inter-connectivity, whereas, this feature is not shared by the Covid-19 map. The observation is
understandable in light of the fact that the SARS and MERS literatures are relatively well
established and have each been under development over a period of several years, whereas the
Covid-19 literature is an emerging field, and newly published studies do not seem to be sharing
many references as of yet. The comparison also suggests that the Covid-19 studies are generally
scattered across a broader variety of journals and subject areas, as opposed to the SARS and
MERS publications that seem to have been concentrated across a smaller set of specialty
journals. This is also consistent with our observations from Figures 1-3 showing that studies of
Covid-19 are scattered across a broader variety of subject areas compared to the SARS and
MERS literature. Though not shown in Figure 3, due to the respective values being smaller
than 1%, journals in the following subject areas (that are deemed minor areas in relation to
Covid-19 literature) have each published a relatively considerable number of studies on this
topics (a phenomenon that is not necessarily common with respect to the literature of other
Coronaviruses): Arts and Humanities (110 items1, where the most active journal has been
Social Anthropology (24 items) covering topics such as “climate change reactions” (Bychkova
2020), or “legal voids linked to declared states of emergency” (Karaseva 2020)), Economics,
Econometrics and Finance (84 items, with Economic and Political Weekly (36 items) being
the most active journal of that category, covering topics such as “food supply chains” (Reardon
et al. 2020), “economic stimulus packages” (Mulchandani 2020) or “reverse migration”
(Dandekar and Ghai 2020)), Physics and Astronomy (77 items, where Chaos Solitons and
Fractals (16 items) has been the most active publication outlet, covering topics such as
“mathematical models for forecasting the outbreak” (Barmparis and Tsironis 2020, Bekiros
and Kouloumpou 2020, Boccaletti et al. 2020, Ndaïrou et al. 2020, Postnikov 2020, Ribeiro et
al. 2020, Zhang et al. 2020)), Energy (67 items, with International Journal of Advanced
Science And Technology (44 items) being the most active journal in that category, covering
topics such as “Flexible work arrangement in manufacturing” (Sedaju et al. 2020)), Material
Sciences (57 items, with ACS Nano (10 items) being the most active outlet in that category,

1

Note that these Figures are based on a renewed Scopus search on May 30, 2020 when the total number of
Covid-19 studies had already exceeded 13,700.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

covering topics such as “3-D printed protective equipment” (Wesemann et al. 2020)), Decision
Sciences (23 items, with Lancet Digital Health (8 items) and Transportation Research
Interdisciplinary Perspectives (4 items) being the most active outlets in that category, covering
topics such as “the effect of social distancing on travel behaviour” (De Vos 2020) or “the
implementation of drive-through and walk-through diagnostic testing” (Lee and Lee 2020)),
Earth and Planetary Sciences (22 items, with Indonesian Journal of Science and Technology
(8 items) being most active in that domain, covering topics such as “the deployment of drones
in sending drugs and patient blood samples” (Anggraeni et al. 2020)).
An evident source that seem to have consistently published a substantial portion of studies on
SARS and MERS is Journal of Virology. This journal, however, has not published a
considerable number of studies on Covid-19, and with only eight publications on this topic at
the time of writing this article, it does not have a strong representation on the map associated
with Covid-19 literature. The Lancet and Science, however, are two major outlets notably
observable on all three maps. For Covid-19 studies in particular, journals such as Journal of
Medical Virology, The BMJ, The Lancet, Journal of Infection, Science, Nature, Science of the
Total Environment and Medical Hypotheses have been most notable outlets of publications so
far. Some of these outlasts, such as Science of the Total Environment and Medical Hypotheses,
do not have a strong representation on the maps associated with the SARS or MERS.
In terms of the bibliographic coupling of the sources for SARS publications, the strong relation
between Journal of Virology and Virology, and to lesser extent, with Emerging Infectious
Diseases are outstanding. For MERS publications, the strong bibliographic coupling of
publications between Emerging Infectious Diseases and Journal of Virology is most
outstanding. For Covid-19 publications, the one outstanding bibliographic coupling relation is
between Journal of Medical Virology and Journal of Infection.
The analyses of journal citations also showed similar patterns of scatter and relatively unclear
clusters in relation to the Covid-19 literature compared to well-defined clusters of journal
citations for SARS and MERS literatures. Consistent with the previous observation with
respect to journal bibliographic coupling, the Covid-19 literature seems to be also much less
cohesive in terms of its journal citation networks, when compared to the SARS and MERS
literatures. As discussed earlier in relation to bibliographic couplings, this could also be partly
explained by the fact that Covid-19 papers are scattered across a more diverse range of journals
and broader variety of subject categories. For the maps of journal citation relations presented
in Figures 11, 12 and 13, only the strongest citation relations have been visualised. They have
also been overlaid with average citation colour coding. For SARS, the maps present very strong
citation relations between publications in Journal of Virology and those of Virology, PNAS and
Science (and to a lesser extent, with Emerging Infectious Diseases, The Lancet and New
England Journal of Medicine). For MERS publications, the strong citation relation between
Emerging infectious Diseases and New England Journal of Medicine are the ones that most
stand out. Also, for the Covid-19 literature, three pairs of strong citation relations are
identifiable: first one between Journal of Medical Virology and The Lancet, second one
between Journal of Medical Virology and New England Journal of Medicine, and third one
between European Radiology and Radiology.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In Figures A10-A14 in the Appendix, the nodes of the bibliographic coupling maps have been
colour-coded by the average year of publications and the average citations per document
associated with the journals that each node represent (except for the Covid-19 map that has
only been overlaid with the average citations). According to these maps, Emerging Infectious
Diseases and The Lancet have been a major source of publications for early studies on both
SARS and MERS. This pattern for The Lancet seems to have extended to Covid-19 studies as
well, as this journal has published a substantial portion of early studies on this topic. For SARS,
the strong representation of Chinese Medical Journal and Chinese Journal of Microbiology
and Immunology among the journals that published early studies are notable, a pattern that
could be explained by the geographical origin of the SARS outbreak. Such pattern is to a less
obvious extent observable in regard to the MERS literature through representations of outlets
such as Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal and Saudi Medical Journal on the bibliographic
coupling map associated with this literature by colours associated with relatively early
publications.
In terms of the average number of citations, studies published by The Lancet have consistently
and across all three literatures received high citations. For the SARS literature in particular,
other sources whose publications on this topic received high numbers of citations are New
England Journal of Medicine, PNAS, Current Medical Chemistry, Journal of Pathology, Plos
Biology, and Nature Reviews Microbiology. The counterpart outlets associated with the MERS
literature are Journal of Virology, Science, mbio, and New England Journal of Medicine. For
Covid-19 studies, publications of Nature, Eurosurveillance, The Lancet Infectious Diseases,
JAMA, The New England Journal of Medicine, and Radiology have on average been among
the most cited studies.

Figure 8 The map of bibliographic coupling of sources associated with the SARS literature.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 9 The map of bibliographic coupling of sources associated with the MERS literature.

Figure 10 The map of bibliographic coupling of sources associated with the Covid-19 literature.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 11 The map of strongest citation network of sources for SARS overlaid with the colour-coding
of the average citation per document

Figure 12 The map of strongest citation network of sources for MERS overlaid with the colourcoding of the average citation per document

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 13 The map of strongest citation network of sources for Covid-19 overlaid with the colourcoding of the average citation per document

5. Co-authorship between countries
Collaborations of authors aggregated at the level of the countries were also analysed with
respect to the SARS, MERS and Covid-19 literatures. Outputs of the analysis are presented in
Figures 14, 15 and 16 for SARS, MERS and Covid-19 respectively. In each map, the size of
nodes, each corresponding with a country, are proportional to the number of published
documents with an author affiliated with the institutes of those countries. The links connecting
the nodes indicate co-authorships between authors residing in the countries, while the thickness
of the links represent the strength (i.e. frequency) of the co-authorships. The colour assigned
to each node represents the average number of citations that documents authored by the
countries have received. The minimum number of documents for country names to appear on
the maps has been set to 5.
Comparison across the three maps of co-authorships shows a pattern of author involvement
from the regions where each viral outbreak originated. Studies authored by researchers
affiliated with Chinese institutes are well represented in all three cases, but clearly more so
with respect to the SARS and Covid-19 literature, diseases whose first cases were recorded in
China. The involvement of Chinese authors is relatively less notable in relation to the MERS
studies whose origin was in the Middle East. Instead, with respect to the MERS literature, it
appears that authors affiliated with institutes in Saudi Arabia have been exceptionally
overrepresented in the publications. This is also, to a lesser extent, the case with Egypt being
notably presented on the MERS map of the country co-authorships.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

On SARS studies, Chinese authors have most strongly collaborated with authors residing in
the United States, followed by authors from Germany, Taiwan, Singapore, Japan, France,
Australia, United Kingdom and Canada. The SARS network of collaborations for the authors
affiliated with Institutes in the United States has been, by and large, similar to that of China,
except South Korea, The Netherlands, Italy and Spain are also strongly represented in the
collaborations with the United States.
The map of co-authorships associated with the MERS literature presents the names of many
Middle Eastern countries including Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Lebanon, Iran, Tunisia, Qatar, Oman,
Jordan, and United Arab Emirates which is a clear indication into the exceptionally strong
representation of the authors from this region in these studies. The strongest network of coauthorships on this topic are observed between authors from the United States and those of
Saudi Arabia, followed by China, United Kingdom, Egypt, South Korea, Canada and the
Netherlands. The closest collaborators of Chinese authors on this topic, after the United states,
have been from Saudi Arabia, United Kingdom and Egypt. The closest collaborators of Saudi
Arabia, after the United States, have been Egypt, China and United Kingdom.
The Covid-19 map presents a considerably higher number of country names compared to that
of the SARS and MERS literatures. It clearly shows that authors from more countries have
become involved in studies of Covid-19, compared to the research on SARS and MERS that
have apparently engaged a lesser number of countries. China, on the topic of Covid-19, has a
very well spread and rather more evenly distributed network of collaborations with countries
across the world, when compared with its network of collaboration on SARS and MERS. While
its strongest collaboration has been with the United States, the names of many other countries
appear on its network with no particular country standing out distinctly. Italy, as a country that
was highly affected by the viral outbreak, has been exceptionally well represented on this map
with a very strong link of collaboration with the United States, followed by United Kingdom
at a smaller scale. This pattern of unique over-representation has to a lesser extent extended to
Iran, Spain, France and Brazil as other countries also severely affected by the Covid-19
outbreak at early stages of the global spread.
The SARS studies with involvements of the authors affiliated with the institutes in the
Netherlands have on average received the highest number of citations and this is followed by
authors from Germany, as two countries whose authors have both published considerable
number of documents and received high number of citations at the same time. This pattern was,
to some extent, repeated in relation to the MERS literature, with studies from the Netherlands,
Germany and United Kingdom having received on average highest number of citations. For
studies published on Covid-19, studies from China have so far stood out in terms of both the
magnitude of research activities and the average number of citations.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 14 The map of country co-authorships associated with the SARS literature.

Figure 15 The map of country co-authorships associated with the MERS literature.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 16 The map of country co-authorships associated with the Covid-19 literature.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

6. Summary and conclusions
Outbreaks of infectious diseases have often shown a pattern of generating a quick surge of
publications on their respective topics, such that they often create an entirely new literature
over a short amount of time (Olijnyk 2015, Tian and Zheng 2015). By all measures, however,
the influx of research publications that began to emerge following the 2019 Novel Coronavirus
outbreak outsizes those of the previous cases in the history of Coronaviruses, and perhaps
arguably, in the history of infectious diaereses (Tian and Zheng 2015). This has certainly
marked a new milestone in the timeline of research on Coronaviruses which dates back to 1968
(Almeida et al. 1968). According to the editor-in-chief of the Journal of Virology, as quoted in
an article of The Scientist magazine (Jarvis 2020), this surge of research outputs has been to
the extent that has inundated established Coronavirus researchers and domain experts with peer
review requests to an extent that they are unable to cope. Parallel to such intensified efforts in
the research, peer review and editorial fronts, widespread efforts are underway in synthesising,
summarising and visualising these rapid developments, a pattern that has also been observed—
though at much smaller scales—in relation to the previous epidemics of viral diseases (Kostoff
and Morse 2011). In line with these endeavours, this work also aimed at quantifying and
analysing scientometric aspects of the Covid-19 literature in contrast with those of the previous
major Coronavirus diseases, i.e. SARS and MERS. The focus for sourcing these literatures has
been on peer reviewed and published studies that have been indexed by Scopus.
An analysis of the timeline of the development of publications on Coronaviruses made clear
that the SARS outbreak constitutes the first major milestone in the history of this research, an
event that brought a then-unprecedented amount of attention to this topic. While Scopus has
indexed a total of nearly 4,400 studies on Coronaviruses from 1968 till 2002, the three
immediate years post the SARS outbreak (i.e. November 2002) have each recorded nearly
1,000 Coronavirus publications. This means that following the SARS outbreak, the then-36year-old literature of Coronaviruses almost expanded by 70% within only three years. This
trend, however, did not persist to the years succeeding 2005, as from that point on, a gradual
decline in the rate of publications on Coronaviruses began. This continued until the 2012
MERS outbreak, another event that reinvigorated the coronavirus research, though not as
substantially as that of the SARS epidemic. The pattern of a few years of increase in research
activities on Coronaviruses followed by a gradual decline, observed in relation to SARS, also
repeated in a similar fashion after the MERS outbreak. The outbreak of 2019 Novel
Coronavirus, however, marks a unique milestone in this timeline. The magnitude of scholarly
outputs prompted by this novel virus was to the extent that, in less than five months, 12,000
publications is already indexed by Scopus, a number that is nearly equivalent of 70% of the
total amount of literature generated on Coronaviruses during the 50 years of this research prior
to 2020.
By retrieving and disentangling the literatures linked to these three Coronavirus respiratory
diseases, we sought to discover similarities and discrepancies of their research landscape from
scientometric analysis perspectives. The most interesting pattern was the recurrence of three
distinct clusters of studies in each literature as suggested by keyword co-occurrence analyses.
It appeared that, following each outbreak, an early cluster of studies first emerged, addressing

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

issues attributable to the public emergency management aspects of a pandemic, such as
prediction of disease propagation, measures of outbreak control, public policy making, and
concerns related to the protection of medical professionals and mental health. Compared to the
two other clusters, studies of this cluster seem to have been the recipient of relatively smaller
number of citations consistently across all three literatures. The two other clusters, one on virus
chemistry and physiology and the other on vaccine, treatment and clinical care emerged
relatively later but received higher number of citations.
Citation and bibliographic coupling analysis at the level of journals demonstrated that firstly,
Covid-19 studies are scattered across a broader variety of sources and subject categories, and
secondly, its network of journal relations is still not as cohesive as those of the SARS and
MERS literatures. As the literature on Covid-19 further develops, more cohesive patterns of
bibliographic coupling or journal citations might emerge. While Journal of Virology and
Emerging Infectious Diseases seem to have been two major outlets commonly prominent
across both SARS and MERS literatures, their presence in the literature of Covid-19 seem not
be distinctly notable. Instead, a great portion of Covid-19 studies have concentrated across
three journals: The Lancet, The BMJ, and Journal of Medical Virology. While major
multidisciplinary journals, particularly Science, Nature, PNAS and PLOS ONE, have, to
varying degrees, been active in publishing studies on all three topics, their influence is most
notable in relation to the SARS literature where they have published a substantial portion of
studies and those studies have been recipients of relatively high number of citations too.
The involvement of authors from various countries on the publications linked to these three
diseases seem to be distinctly correlated with the regions where the outbreaks originated, with
authors from China, for example, being much more strongly represented on SARS and Covid19 studies, two diseases whose origin of outbreaks were attributed to this country. Middle
Eastern countries, on the other hand, are exceptionally represented in the MERS literature.
The questions of where the Covid-19 literature is headed, how big it will grow in the next
coming years, at what point in time the rate of publications on this topic are going to slow down
(if ever) and how widely this literature is going to spread across journals and subject categories
are only a few examples of questions that will be determined by time. These may also be
influenced down the line by possible highly sought medical discoveries in relation to vaccine
and treatment development, or lack thereof. But given the current rate at which scholarly
outputs are emerging and given the extent of studies, projects, and trials that have already been
conceived on this topic around the world; and also given the seemingly long-lasting and farreaching consequences of this global emergency which have impacted on aspects of life, it will
probably not be so soon before we observe a decline in Covid-19 research interest.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
Almeida, J., Berry, D., Cunningham, C., Hamre, D., Hofstad, M., Mallucci, L., Mcintosh, K., Tyrrell, D.,
1968. Coronaviruses. Nature 220 (650), 2.
Anggraeni, S., Maulidina, A., Dewi, M.W., Rahmadianti, S., Rizky, Y.P.C., Arinalhaq, Z.F., Usdiyana, D.,
Nandiyanto, A.B.D., Mahdi Al-Obaidi, A.S., 2020. The deployment of drones in sending drugs
and patient blood samples covid-19. Indonesian Journal of Science and Technology 5 (2).
Barmparis, G.D., Tsironis, G.P., 2020. Estimating the infection horizon of covid-19 in eight countries
with a data-driven approach. Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 135.
Bekiros, S., Kouloumpou, D., 2020. Sbdiem: A new mathematical model of infectious disease
dynamics. Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 136.
Boccaletti, S., Ditto, W., Mindlin, G., Atangana, A., 2020. Modeling and forecasting of epidemic
spreading: The case of covid-19 and beyond. Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 135.
Bonilla-Aldana, D.K., Quintero-Rada, K., Montoya-Posada, J.P., Ramírez-Ocampo, S., Paniz-Mondolfi,
A., Rabaan, A.A., Sah, R., Rodríguez-Morales, A.J., 2020. Sars-cov, mers-cov and now the
2019-novel cov: Have we investigated enough about coronaviruses?–a bibliometric analysis.
Travel medicine and infectious disease 33, 101566.
Brainard, J., 2020. Scientists are drowning in covid-19 papers. Can new tools keep them afloat?
Science.
Bychkova, O.V., 2020. Covid-19 and climate change reactions: Sts potential of online research. Social
Anthropology.
Cavanagh, D., 2005. Coronaviridae: A review of coronaviruses and toroviruses. Coronaviruses with
special emphasis on first insights concerning sars. Springer, pp. 1-54.
Chahrour, M., Assi, S., Bejjani, M., Nasrallah, A.A., Salhab, H., Fares, M., Khachfe, H.H., 2020. A
bibliometric analysis of covid-19 research activity: A call for increased output. Cureus 12 (3).
Chang, L., Yan, Y., Wang, L., 2020. Coronavirus disease 2019: Coronaviruses and blood safety.
Transfusion Medicine Reviews.
Chen, Y., Liu, Q., Guo, D., 2020. Emerging coronaviruses: Genome structure, replication, and
pathogenesis. Journal of medical virology 92 (4), 418-423.
Cherry, J.D., Krogstad, P., 2004. Sars: The first pandemic of the 21 st century. Pediatric research 56
(1), 1-5.
Colavizza, G., Costas, R., Traag, V.A., Van Eck, N.J., Van Leeuwen, T., Waltman, L., 2020. A
scientometric overview of cord-19. BioRxiv.
Cortegiani, A., Ingoglia, G., Ippolito, M., Giarratano, A., Einav, S., 2020. A systematic review on the
efficacy and safety of chloroquine for the treatment of covid-19. Journal of Critical Care.
Dandekar, A., Ghai, R., 2020. Migration and reverse migration in the age of covid-19. Economic and
Political Weekly 55 (19), 28-31.
De Vos, J., 2020. The effect of covid-19 and subsequent social distancing on travel behavior.
Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives 5.
Dehghanbanadaki, H., Seif, F., Vahidi, Y., Razi, F., Hashemi, E., Khoshmirsafa, M., Aazami, H., 2020.
Bibliometric analysis of global scientific research on coronavirus (covid-19). Medical Journal
of The Islamic Republic of Iran (MJIRI) 34 (1), 354-362.
Golinelli, D., Nuzzolese, A.G., Boetto, E., Rallo, F., Greco, M., Toscano, F., Fantini, M.P., 2020. The
impact of early scientific literature in response to covid-19: A scientometric perspective.
medRxiv.
Haghani, M., Bliemer, M.C.J., Goerlandt, F., Li, J., 2020. The scientific literature on coronaviruses,
covid-19 and its associated safety-related research dimensions: A scientometric analysis and
scoping review. Safety Science 129, 104806.
Hossain, M.M., 2020. Current status of global research on novel coronavirus disease (covid-19): A
bibliometric analysis and knowledge mapping. Available at SSRN 3547824.
Jarvis, C., 2020. Journals, peer reviewers cope with surge in covid-19 publications. The Scientist.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Kagan, D., Moran-Gilad, J., Fire, M., 2020. Scientometric trends for coronaviruses and other
emerging viral infections. BioRxiv.
Karaseva, A., 2020. The legal void and covid-19 governance. Social Anthropology.
Knight, C.A., 1954. The chemical constitution of viruses. In: Smith, K.M., Lauffer, M.A. eds. Advances
in virus research. Academic Press, pp. 153-182.
Kostoff, R.N., Morse, S.A., 2011. Structure and infrastructure of infectious agent research literature:
Sars. Scientometrics 86 (1), 195-209.
Kumar, K., 2020. Author productivity of covid-19 research output globally: Testing lotka's law.
Available at SSRN 3603889.
Le Bras, P., Gharavi, A., Robb, D.A., Vidal, A.F., Padilla, S., Chantler, M.J., 2020. Visualising covid-19
research. arXiv, arXiv: 2005.06380.
Lee, D., Lee, J., 2020. Testing on the move: South korea's rapid response to the covid-19 pandemic.
Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives 5.
Lim, Y.X., Ng, Y.L., Tam, J.P., Liu, D.X., 2016. Human coronaviruses: A review of virus–host
interactions. Diseases 4 (3), 26.
Mcintosh, K., 1974. Coronaviruses: A comparative review. Current topics in microbiology and
immunology/ergebnisse der mikrobiologie und immunitätsforschung. Springer, pp. 85-129.
Mulchandani, P., 2020. Covid-19 crisis: Economic stimulus packages and environmental
sustainability. Economic and Political Weekly 55 (19).
Myint, S., 1994. Human coronaviruses: A brief review. Reviews in Medical Virology 4 (1), 35-46.
Ndaïrou, F., Area, I., Nieto, J.J., Torres, D.F.M., 2020. Mathematical modeling of covid-19
transmission dynamics with a case study of wuhan. Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 135.
Olijnyk, N.V., 2015. An algorithmic historiography of the ebola research specialty: Mapping the
science behind ebola. Scientometrics 105 (1), 623-643.
Postnikov, E.B., 2020. Estimation of covid-19 dynamics “on a back-of-envelope”: Does the simplest
sir model provide quantitative parameters and predictions? Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 135.
Reardon, T., Mishra, A., Nuthalapati, C.S.R., Bellemare, M.F., Zilberman, D., 2020. Covid-19’s
disruption of india’s transformed food supply chains. Economic and Political Weekly 55 (18),
18-22.
Ribeiro, M.H.D.M., Da Silva, R.G., Mariani, V.C., Coelho, L.D.S., 2020. Short-term forecasting covid-19
cumulative confirmed cases: Perspectives for brazil. Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 135.
Sedaju, A., Haryono, S., Anisahwati, N., 2020. Flexible work arrangement in manufacturing during the
covid-19 pandemic: An evidence-based study of indonesian employees. International Journal
of Advanced Science and Technology 29 (6), 3914-3924.
Sohrabi, C., Alsafi, Z., O'neill, N., Khan, M., Kerwan, A., Al-Jabir, A., Iosifidis, C., Agha, R., 2020. World
health organization declares global emergency: A review of the 2019 novel coronavirus
(covid-19). International Journal of Surgery 76, 71-76.
Tian, D., Zheng, T., 2015. Emerging infectious disease: Trends in the literature on sars and h7n9
influenza. Scientometrics 105 (1), 485-495.
Torres-Salinas, D., Robinson-Garcia, N., Castillo-Valdivieso, P.A., 2020. Open access and altmetrics in
the pandemic age: Forescast analysis on covid-19 related literature. BioRxiv.
Van Eck, N., Waltman, L., 2010. Software survey: Vosviewer, a computer program for bibliometric
mapping. scientometrics 84 (2), 523-538.
Wang, L., Wang, Y., Ye, D., Liu, Q., 2020. Review of the 2019 novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) based on
current evidence. International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents, 105948.
Wesemann, C., Pieralli, S., Fretwurst, T., Nold, J., Nelson, K., Schmelzeisen, R., Hellwig, E., Spies, B.C.,
2020. 3-d printed protective equipment during covid-19 pandemic. Materials 13 (8).
Zhang, X., Ma, R., Wang, L., 2020. Predicting turning point, duration and attack rate of covid-19
outbreaks in major western countries. Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 135.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Appendix

Figure A1 The map of keyword co-occurrence for SARS overlaid with the colour-coding of
the average year of publication

Figure A2 The map of keyword co-occurrence for SARS overlaid with the colour-coding of
the average citation number

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure A3 The map of keyword co-occurrence for MERS overlaid with the colour-coding of
the average year of publication

Figure A4 The map of keyword co-occurrence for MERS overlaid with the colour-coding of
the average citation number

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure A5 The heatmap of keyword co-occurrence for Covid-19

Figure A6 The map of keyword co-occurrence for Covid-19 overlaid with the colour-coding
the average citation number

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure A7 The map of term co-occurrence for SARS based on text analysis of titles and
abstracts

Figure A8 The map of term co-occurrence for MERS based on text analysis of titles and
abstracts

Figure A9 The map of term co-occurrence for MERS based on text analysis of titles and
abstracts

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure A10 The map of bibliographic coupling of sources for SARS overlaid with the
colour-coding of the average publication year

Figure A11 The map of bibliographic coupling of sources for SARS overlaid with the
colour-coding of the average citation per document

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure A12 The map of bibliographic coupling of sources for MERS overlaid with the
colour-coding of the average publication year

Figure A13 The map of bibliographic coupling of sources for MERS overlaid with the
colour-coding of the average citation per document

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.31.126813; this version posted June 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure A14 The map of bibliographic coupling of sources for Covid-19 overlaid with the
colour-coding of the average citation per document

