bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Comprehensive analysis of the host-virus interactome of SARS-CoV-2

Zhen Chen1,2, Chao Wang1,2, Xu Feng1,2, Litong Nie1, Mengfan Tang1, Huimin Zhang1, Yun
Xiong1, Samuel K. Swisher1, Mrinal Srivastava1, and Junjie Chen1*

1Department

of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson

Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA
2These

authors contributed equally to this work.

*Correspondence: jchen8@mdanderson.org

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ABSTRACT
Host-virus protein-protein interaction is the key component of the severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) lifecycle. We conducted a comprehensive interactome
study between the virus and host cells using tandem affinity purification and proximity labeling
strategies and identified 437 human proteins as the high-confidence interacting proteins.
Functional characterization and further validation of these interactions elucidated how distinct
SARS-CoV-2 viral proteins participate in its lifecycle, and discovered potential drug targets to
the treatment of COVID-19. The interactomes of two key SARS-CoV-2 encoded viral proteins,
NSP1 and N protein, were compared with the interactomes of their counterparts in other human
coronaviruses. These comparisons not only revealed common host pathways these viruses
manipulate for their survival, but also showed divergent protein-protein interactions that may
explain differences in disease pathology. This comprehensive interactome of coronavirus
disease-2019 provides valuable resources for understanding and treating this disease.

Keywords: SARS-CoV-2, interactome, host-virus protein-protein interaction, human
coronavirus, SFB-TAP, BioID2

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

INTRODUCTION
The ongoing global pandemic of coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19) was first reported in
December 2019. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) was
identified as the virus causing COVID-19 1. SARS-CoV-2 is a highly transmissible and
pathogenic coronavirus. It spreads easily through the air when people are physically near each
other. As of 18 December 2020, more than 75 million cases had been confirmed, resulting in
more than 1.6 million deaths.
SARS-CoV-2 is a novel beta coronavirus with a genome composed of approximately 30
kb of positive-strand RNA. It shares 79% genomic sequence identity with SARS-CoV-1, which
caused the SARS epidemic in 2003 2. The SARS-CoV-2 genome contains 14 open reading
frames (ORFs), including one large ORF that encodes two large polyproteins (ORF1a and
ORF1ab) and 13 small ORFs that encode viral structural proteins and other polypeptides. The
polyproteins from the large ORF can be further cleaved into 16 non-structure proteins (NSP1 to
NSP16) 2.
Researchers have tried several strategies to develop drugs and vaccines to treat SARSCoV-2 and COVID-19. Viruses usually encode very limited viral genes and proteins and thus
need to recruit many host proteins to complete the viral lifecycle. Therefore, identifying proteinprotein interactions between viral proteins and their host cellular cofactors is an important and
efficient way to understand the virus and uncover potential drug targets. Such host-virus
interactome analysis has been reported recently 3.
There are two well-developed strategies to study the protein-protein interactome, affinity
purification (AP) and a proximity labeling-based strategy, followed by mass spectrometry (MS)
analysis 4. AP-MS is a widely used and highly reproducible method that allows identification of
physiologically relevant interaction proteins. However, this method may miss weak or transient
binding proteins during the pulldown process, even when it is performed in a mild buffer. In
addition, AP-MS may not capture poorly soluble protein partners, such as membrane-

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

associated proteins, which are critically important for the viral lifecycle. The proximity labelingbased strategy solves these problems by labeling nearby proteins before harvesting cells. This
method is based on an enzyme-substrate reaction with an effective labeling radius of about 10
nm. The drawback of this method is that it may fail to label the binding proteins located outside
of this labeling range. Therefore, combining these two strategies should allow us to generate a
comprehensive host-virus interactome network that is important for the SARS-Cov-2 lifecycle.
In the current study, we applied these two strategies, i.e., tandem affinity purification
(TAP) with the SFB (S-protein, FLAG epitope, and streptavidin-binding peptide) tag and
proximity labeling with a second-generation biotin ligase, BioID2, for a comprehensive analysis
of the host-virus protein-protein interaction network. With an interactome analysis of 29 SARSCoV-2 cDNAs, we uncovered key human proteins involved in the SARS-CoV-2 lifecycle of
infection, replication, and budding. This interactome dataset not only confirmed some previously
reported host-virus interactions but also uncovered numerous new interacting proteins that may
be critical for the SARS-Cov-2 lifecycle. This dataset will benefit further investigations of the
mechanisms underlying viral infection and lifecycle and potential new drug targets for the
treatment of COVID-19. Moreover, we compared the interactomes of two critical viral genes,
NSP1 and N protein, among different human coronaviruses. These analyses will help us to fight
SARS-CoV-2 and future pandemics caused by new coronaviruses.

RESULTS
Overview of the Interactome Analysis between Host and SARS-CoV-2
To comprehensively illustrate the host and SARS-CoV-2 protein-protein interaction network, we
performed an interactome study using two different strategies, TAP with the SFB tag and
proximity labeling with the BioID2 tag. Genome annotation revealed 29 gene products from
SARS-CoV-2, including 16 NSPs, 4 structure proteins, and 9 accessary factors (Figure 1A).
These viral gene products were fused with the SFB or BioID2 tag and stably expressed in

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

HEK293T cells, except NSP1, which was done with transient expression. Stable viral gene
expression in cells was verified by immunoblotting (Figures S1A and S1B). Labeling reactions
of fused BioID2-viral genes were confirmed using the streptavidin antibody (Figure S1C). Three
biological replicates of the interactome experiments were conducted for each tag and each
fused viral gene, along with controls (vector with tag only or fused with GFP sequence) following
the workflow presented in Figure 1B. After analysis by Q Exactive HF MS, the data were
searched against a database integrated with all human genes, viral genes, GFP, and the tag
sequences (Tables S1). All experiments are summarized in Figure 1C. The Pearson correlation
coefficient among three independent biological replicates of the SFB-TAP results and BioID2
labeling experiments was calculated (Figure 1D).
The identified proteins were filtered using Significance Analysis of INTeractome
(SAINTexpress) 5. The SAINTexpress scores were averaged among the three biological
replicates to calculate a Bayesian false discovery rate, and preys with a Bayesian false
discovery rate of 0.05 or less were considered high-confidence interacting proteins (HCIPs). In
total, we obtained 314 HCIPs from SFB-TAP and 130 HCIPs from BioID2 experiments (Table
S2). We combined these two datasets and generated a list of HCIPs, which included 437 pairs
of virus-host interacting proteins (Figure 1C). GO analysis of these 437 viral interacting proteins
showed that the preys were localized in various subcellular locations (Figure 1E). Many of the
preys localized on various plasma membrane structures, such as the endoplasmic reticulum,
Golgi membrane, or cell membrane. Protein function analysis also showed that many of the
preys had roles in transporter, ion channel, and peptidase processes (Figure 1F). The biological
processes enriched included vesicle organization, organelle localization, and vesicle-mediated
transport (Figure 1G). These preys may assist SARS-CoV-2 infection, replication, and budding.
Another group of enriched proteins is involved in ribosome function, indicating that these preys
may be exploited by viral proteins to suppress host cell translation and facilitate viral gene
expression.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The number of HCIPs for each SARS-CoV-2 viral gene product varied. Some of the
baits had less than five high-confidence host binding partners, such as NSP2, NSP4, NSP8,
NSP9, NSP11, NSP12, NSP13, NSP14, NSP16, ORF3b, ORF7a, and ORF10, indicating that
the major functions of these viral proteins may be carried out independently, with other viral
proteins, and/or with very limited host functional protein partners. However, viral proteins N,
ORF7b, M, and NSP6 had 102, 63, 53, and 48 host protein partners, respectively (Figure 1H).
These viral gene products may work closely with host proteins to facilitate the viral lifecycle.
The fold change calculated by SAINTexpress analysis and the averaged peptidespectrum matches (PSMs) of the identified preys are plotted in Figure 1I. The orange and red
dots in the upper right represent HCIPs. The most significant interaction pair, ORF9b-TOMM70,
was identified in more than 1000 PSMs of the prey. This interaction was reported recently in a
structural study of the complex 6. We also identified several binding pairs with very high MS
signals, including ORF3a-VSP39, ORF3a-VSP11, ORF3a-CLCC1, NSP1-PYCR1, NSP1PYCR2, N-G3BP1, and N-G3BP2. These strong interacting partners may have cellular functions
important to SARS-CoV-2. The function of these preys may be taken over by the virus to
suppress host cell activities and facilitate viral infection, replication, and maturation.

Analysis of the Interactions between SARS-CoV-2 and Human Proteins
We next built an interaction network using the 437 identified virus-host protein-protein
interactions. We found that many pathways or function complexes were highly enriched for
binding to a specific SARS-CoV-2 gene product, as shown in Figure 2. Function enrichment
may help us elucidate the biological functions and underlying mechanisms of these SARS-CoV2 viral genes and design drugs targeting these virus-host interactions and/or the host
complexes/pathways that are most relevant to this virus.

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

SARS-CoV-2 Interacts with Host Proteins, which may Facilitate Viral Infection,
Trafficking, and Budding
Most enveloped viruses do not encode their own membrane fission machinery, which is
required for viral entry, transport, and budding 7. Therefore, many host membrane proteins are
recruited to work with the virus gene products to complete these functions. Our analysis of the
SARS-CoV-2 virus-host protein-protein interaction network indicated that several viral gene
products, such as M protein, NSP6, ORF3a, ORF6, and ORF7b, are involved in these
processes.
M protein shares some host binding partners with another SARS-CoV-2 protein, ORF7b
(Figure 2). Both proteins interact with several components of the SNARE complex, such as
STX6 and STX10. The use of ORF7b as the bait led to the identification of more SNARE
complex components, including STX12, STX16, VAMP2, VAMP3, VAMP4, VAMP8, NAPA,
NAPG, and SNAP29. The SNARE complex is involved in eukaryotic membrane fusion and
vesicular transport. This complex is known to be targeted by viruses during early infection, late
viral production, and viral exit 8,9. Many components of the HOPS complex, including VPS11,
VPS16, VPS18, VPS39, and VPS41, were identified in interactions with the viral protein ORF3a
(Figure 2). This complex plays a role in vesicle-mediated protein trafficking to lysosomal
compartments and mediates tethering and docking events during SNARE-mediated membrane
fusion through interaction with the SNARE complex 10. The interactions of different viral proteins
with distinct cellular complexes suggest that these associations are coordinated by the virus to
maximize viral protein trafficking between different membrane-associated compartments.
CAV1 is well studied, with known functions in endocytosis and subsequent cytoplasmic
transportation. Many steps during viral infection, such as the uptake of the virus, viral protein
expression, and virion release, require CAV1 (Hoffmann and Pohlmann, 2018; Xing et al.,
2020). The M protein and NSP6 of SARS-CoV-2 interact with CAV1 (Figure 2), suggesting that
SARS-CoV-2 may involve CAV1 in both viral entry and a later step of the viral lifecycle.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Additionally, ORF3a interacts with TRAPPC9 and TRAPPC10 (Figure 2), subunits of the
trafficking protein particle complex, which is known to have a function in vesicular transport from
the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi apparatus. ORF6 binds to several components of the
COPII complex (Figure 2), including SEC23A, SEC24A, and SEC31A, and may be involved in
the formation of transport vesicles from the endoplasmic reticulum 11. These host transportation
systems are likely recruited by SARS-CoV-2 to facilitate its own gene expression, production,
and transportation following viral infection.
We also identified a strong protein-protein interaction between ORF3a and CLCC1
(Figure 2). CLCC1 is a chloride ion channel protein with limited studies, and its functions are
not well known. We obtained it as one of the top SARS-CoV-2 and host interaction proteins. In
Figure 3A, we confirmed the interactions of ORF3a with CLCC1 and VPS11. These host
proteins bind specifically to ORF3a. Furthermore, we examined the localization of CLCC1 with
or without ORF3a overexpression (Figure 3B). CLCC1 is characterized as an endoplasmic
reticulum protein, which was confirmed by our immunofluorescence results in cells without
ORF3a overexpression. ORF3a is reported to be an endosome and lysosome-associated
protein 12, which was also validated by our immunofluorescence results. When ORF3a was
overexpressed, the localization of CLCC1 changed to strong co-localization with ORF3a in the
endosome and lysosome. Early reports suggest that chloride channel function may be required
for the viral lifecycle 13,14. Our results indicate that SARS-CoV-2 may take over the function of
CLCC1 protein to promote its own lifecycle. Although the detailed mechanisms remain to be
elucidated with future functional analysis, the strong interaction between ORF3a and CLCC1
indicates that disrupting this interaction and/or CLCC1 function may affect the SARS-CoV-2
lifecycle.
In summary, we identified several SARS-CoV-2 gene products, M protein, NSP6,
ORF3a, ORF6, and ORF7b, that interacted with host cell membrane proteins and complexes.
The transmembrane domain prediction by TMHMM 2.0 also suggested that these viral gene

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

products have at least one transmembrane domain in their protein sequences, except for ORF6,
which is a short protein with only 61 amino acids. These viral proteins may have key functions
and recruit host membrane proteins and complexes to facilitate viral infection, trafficking, and/or
budding.

SARS-CoV-2 Manipulates the Host Cell Replication, Transcription, and Translation
Machinery
After a virus infects a host cell, it needs to suppress the host cell replication, transcription, and
translation processes and recruit those factors for the lifecycle of the virus. According to our
virus-host interactome analysis, NSP1, NSP3, NSP5, and N protein of SARS-CoV-2 are the
major viral proteins involved in the regulation of host replication, transcription, and translation.
NSP1 is a well-studied coronavirus non-structural gene product that displays biological
functions in suppressing host gene expression 15-17. Accordingly, we identified nine HCIPs of
eukaryotic initiation factor 3 (EIF3) complex subunits that bind to NSP1 (Figure 2). EIF3 is the
largest translation initiation factor complex, composed of 13 subunits. It is involved in nearly all
steps of translation initiation 18. The EIF3 complex has been shown to be a virus binding
complex that results in the suppression of host gene expression 19, which is consistent with our
interactome results.
In addition to the HCIPs functioning in translation regulation, we also identified the whole
DNA polymerase alpha complex, i.e., POLA1, POLA2, PRIM1, and PRIM2, in the NSP1
interactome (Figure 2), which is similar to a recent report 3. Moreover, our interactome analysis
revealed that NSP5 associates with several well-studied DNA damage proteins, MDC1, BRCA1,
and USP11 (Figure 2). NSP1 and NSP5 may interact with these host replication and/or DNA
damage–related proteins to inhibit the initiation of host genome replication and DNA damage
response and/or facilitate viral genome replication.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

NSP3 is the largest gene product of coronaviruses, with multiple functional domains that
may be involved in the regulation of replication and/or transcription. The interactome of NSP3
has not been well studied owing to the large protein size of NSP3. In our interactome analysis,
we expressed the full length of NSP3 in both SFB-TAP and BioID2 labeling experiments and
successfully identified >100 PSMs for the bait NSP3. After HCIP analysis, we found that NSP3
interacts with several host proteins involved in transcription regulation as well as in chromatin
assembly and remodeling (Figure 2). BAZ1A, BAZ1B, and SMARCA4 function in the ISWI
complex to control DNA accessibility and chromatin remodeling 20 and may have a role in
transcription regulation during SARS-CoV-2 infection. MACROH2A1, MACROH2A2, SSRP1,
and SUPT16H are nucleosome factors that may also control gene transcription by wrapping and
compacting DNA into chromatin. With these and other preys that may also play roles in
transcription regulation, we believe that the major function of NSP3 is transcription regulation,
which may suppress host gene expression and/or facilitate viral gene expression by binding to
and interfering with multiple host proteins involved in transcription or chromatin control.
Another viral transcription and translation regulator we identified in the interactome
analysis is the N protein. N protein is a nucleocapsid protein that binds directly to the virus
genome. We identified many ribosome proteins with strong interaction with N protein (Figure 2).
This is similar to reports in other virus species showing that viral N proteins bind to host
ribosome subunits 21,22. Ribosome proteins are required for viral gene translation and viral
genome replication 23. SARS-CoV-2 N protein is the first released virus protein after the
infection. It may bind to ribosome proteins quickly to facilitate the translation of other virus
genes. At the next step, a group of ribosome proteins may be recruited by N protein to facilitate
virus genome replication 24. Our data also indicate that the N protein binds to the IGF2BP1
complex, which has been shown previously to enhance viral translation initiation and stabilize
viral RNA 25. In addition to the above-mentioned HCIPs, we identified many other RNA
processing, RNA metabolism, and transcriptional regulatory proteins as N protein interacting

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

partners (Figure 2). These data strongly suggest that N protein is one of the major regulators of
SARS-CoV-2 involved in viral transcription, translation, and genome replication.
We also showed that the signal peptidase complex, including SPCS1, SPCS2, SPCS3,
and SEC11A, significantly binds to the S protein (Figure 2). The signal peptidase complex is
required for post-translational processing of proteins involved in virion assembly and secretion
26-28.

This complex may also promote the interaction between virus structure proteins, which

benefits virus assembly 28. Indeed, we confirmed the interaction of S protein with the signal
peptidase component SPCS2 (Figure 3C), suggesting that the S protein of SARS-CoV-2 may
function similarly to S proteins in other viruses.

SARS-CoV-2 Genome Replication Can Be Mediated through Interactions with Several
Host Proteins
Three components of endoplasmic reticulum membrane protein complex, EMC3, EMC4, and
EMC7, were identified as NSP6 interacting proteins (Figure 2). Large-scale genetic screening
revealed that EMC components may be the essential genes involved in viral replication and
downstream cell death pathways 29. Another genomic screen showed that EMC components are
needed during the early stages of viral infection 30. The interaction between NSP6 and multiple
EMC components suggests that SARS-CoV-2 interacts with the EMC through NSP6, which may
help viral infection and replication.
Moreover, the NSP7-NSP8 complex forms the primase that functions as RNA replicase.
With overexpression of NSP7 alone in HEK293T cells, we captured a group of proteins
belonging to the CCR4-NOT complex, including CNOT1, CNOT2, CNOT3, and CNOT6L
(Figure 2). The CCR4-NOT complex functions in mRNA decay by shorting poly(A) and is
associated with translating ribosomes and RNA processing bodies. A genome-wide genetic
screen to study hepatitis C virus pathogenesis revealed that these four genes are required for
viral infection 31. The CCR4-NOT complex may facilitate viral replication by triggering the

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

turnover of nucleoprotein-bound cellular mRNA and releasing the nucleoprotein to bind viral
genomic RNA for replication 32. With a similar mechanism, the interaction between NSP7 and
the CCR4-NOT complex may facilitate replication of the SARS-CoV-2 genome.
Another replication function–related complex we identified as a HCIP of NSP7 was the
THO/TREX complex. We identified THOC1 and THOC6 as NSP7-interacting proteins (Figure
2). The THO/TREX complex mediates transcription elongation and nuclear export. A study of a
Kaposi sarcoma–associated herpesvirus suggests that this complex is essential for stabilization
and export of viral intron-less mRNAs and production of infectious viral particles 33,34. Interaction
between the viral gene and the THO/TREX complex occurs in an ATP-dependent manner,
which suggests potential drugs to target this interaction 35. Similar drugs may also help in the
treatment of COVID-19.
Taken together, our results showed that NSP6 and NSP7 of SARS-CoV-2 interact with
several protein complexes, and these virus-host protein-protein interactions may inhibit host
functions and facilitate viral genome replication and virus production.

SARS-CoV-2 Controls the Host Cell Metabolism and Signaling Pathways
Mitochondria are the major targets manipulated by the virus after infection. In taking control of
the mitochondria, the virus disrupts host cell functions and forces cells to produce energy and
other products needed for the viral lifecycle 36,37. NSP6 was predicted with eight transmembrane
helices when analyzed with TMHMM 2.0. The SARS-CoV-2 gene NSP6 may play a major role
in hijacking the mitochondria. Interactome analysis of NSP6 revealed that it interacted with a
few subunits of ATP synthase (Figure 2), e.g., ATP5F1B, ATP5F1D, ATP5PB, ATP5PF,
ATP5PO, ATP6AP1, and ATP13A3, indicating that the virus may interfere directly with the
machinery involved in cellular energy production. The interaction of NSP6 with VDAC1 and
VDAC2 may enhance viral infection and replication, as reported in a study of an infectious
bursal disease virus that induces cell death 38,39. NSP6 also binds to PHB and PHB2, which are

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

components of a large ring complex, the prohibitin complex, which stabilizes mitochondrial
respiratory enzymes and maintains mitochondrial integrity 40. These interactions of NSP6 with
mitochondrial proteins suggest that NSP6 may manipulate the host energy production system to
serve the lifecycle of SARS-CoV-2.
NSP6 may also participate in signal transduction; we identified SIGMAR1 as an
important binding protein of NSP6. SIGMAR1 is an endoplasmic reticulum membrane protein
that plays a role in lipid transport and calcium signaling. The interaction between NSP6 and
SIGMAR1 has been studied recently 3, and an antiviral strategy against this prey was found to
be potentially effective. Another SARS-CoV-2 gene involved in signaling pathways was NSP7.
We identified DVL1, DVL2, and DVL3 as NSP7 interacting proteins (Figure 2). These proteins
are central components of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway. Previous studies revealed
that activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway could stimulate viral replication 41,42,
and inhibition of this pathway could reduce the viral yield during productive viral infection 43,44.
Moreover, we showed that NSP10 interacts with several factors involved in the ERK1/ERK2
signaling pathway (Figure 2), implying that SARS-CoV-2 may hijack the MAPK-ERK pathway to
control the cell fate for the viral lifecycle, as reported for other viruses 45.

SARS-CoV-2 Fights Host Cell Immune and Antiviral Systems
Host cells have developed efficient antiviral systems to counter viral infections. Similarly, viruses
find ways to inhibit host antiviral systems to ensure survival. The interferon (IFN)-mediated
antiviral pathway is one of the major innate immune responses against viral pathogens. We
expressed the 29 SARS-CoV-2 coding genes in HEK293T cells and then analyzed the activity
of IFN-beta luciferase reporter response to infection with Sendai virus, or the activity of ISREluciferase reporter response when viral proteins were co-expressed with IRF3 (Figure S2). We
found that two viral proteins, NSP1 and N protein, most significantly suppressed the activation
of IFN signaling based on these two assays.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

NSP1 acts as the strongest gene product in SARS-CoV-2 that helps evade host cell
antiviral defense. It suppresses global gene expression in the host as we mentioned above. Our
host-virus interactome results showed that NSP1 interacts with nine components of the EIF3
complex to suppress the translation machinery. Translation of host antiviral genes is also
inhibited by this global translation suppression function. Therefore, NSP1 acts as the strongest
viral protein that inhibits IFN-beta signaling when overexpressed.
N protein is the first released and most abundant SARS-CoV-2 viral protein upon
infection. We identified several immune response proteins that are recruited by N protein
(Figure 2), and these proteins may facilitate the viral infection and later the viral lifecycle.
Similar to a previous study 3, we identified strong interactions between N protein and RasGTPase–activating protein-binding protein 1/2 (G3BP1/2; Figure 2). G3BP1 plays essential
roles in innate immunity by activating the cGAS/STING pathway and acting as a platform for
antiviral signaling 46. In a previous study of an RNA virus, G3BP1 was found to enlist an antiviral
response by positively regulating RIG-I 47. The strong binding of G3BP1 and G3BP2 with N
protein may inhibit cGAS activation when the SARS-CoV-2 genome is released into host cells.
Another antiviral protein, HERC5, was also identified as an N protein interactor (Figure 2).
HERC5 is the major E3 ligase for ISG15 conjugation, and ISGylation of IRF3 is required to
sustain its activation and boost the antiviral response 48,49. N protein also interacts with TTLL4
(Figure 2), which regulates the nucleotidyl-transferase activity of cGAS. Thus, the N protein
likely represents the first wave of suppressors of host antiviral mechanisms to ensure the
survival of SARS-CoV-2 upon infection.
In addition, NSP5, which is the 3C-like protease of SARS-CoV-2, cleaves the
ORF1a/ORF1ab polyprotein into function fragments. Our interactome analysis revealed a
potential interaction between NSP5 and an IFN-induced antiviral enzyme, OAS3 (Figure 2).
OAS3 is an IFN-induced antiviral gene that plays a critical role in cellular innate antiviral
response 50,51. OAS3 is activated by dsRNA generated after viral infection, and the enzyme then

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

leads to the activation of RNase L to digest the viral RNA and terminate its replication. We
speculate that NSP5 may bind to and cleave OAS3 to inhibit its antiviral function.
We also found that both M protein and ORF7 interact with growth factor receptors
(Figure 2). M protein interacts with FLT4 (VEGFR3), and M protein may be involved in a selfcontrol mechanism to prevent uncontrolled inflammation in macrophages during bacterial
infection 52. A group of ORF7-binding proteins are ERBB receptors and proteins involved in
related signaling pathways, including EGFR (ERBB1), ERBB2, and ERBB4 (Figure 2). There
are four ERBB receptors, and these are suggested to function as gatekeepers of infectious
diseases 53. EGFR was reported to help viruses enter into host cells 54-56. Similarly, ERBB2 was
also targeted by pathogens for cellular entry 57. The membrane association of EGFR and
ERBB2 was increased during viral infection to benefit the processing of hepatitis C virus in
previous studies 58,59. Moreover, ERBB receptors are potent factors promoting cellular growth
and survival, which could prolong host cell survival 60,61 and modulate host immune responses
62,63

to benefit viral production. SARS-CoV-2 is suspected to bind to growth factor receptors and

regulate the related signaling pathways to suppress host antiviral systems and promote host cell
survival to increase viral infection and production.
M protein also interacts with several subunits of clathrin-associated adaptor protein
complexes, AP1G1, AP1M1, AP1S1, and AP4E1 (Figure 2). These adaptor proteins are
involved in protein sorting, vesicle formation, and cargo selection. Binding between adaptor
protein complex 1 and BST2, an antiviral restriction factor that inhibits the release of enveloped
viruses, was shown to retain BST2 in endosomes and stimulate its degradation 64. The
interaction between M protein and these clathrin-associated adapter protein complexes may
suggest mechanisms that lead to mis-trafficking and degradation of host proteins to facilitate
viral infection and the viral lifecycle.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Collectively, the association between several viral proteins and host proteins involved in
antiviral defense and other cellular functions may indicate that SARS-CoV-2 employs multiple
ways to evade host antiviral systems for its survival, reproduction, and release.

Potential Drug Targets Revealed by the Host-Virus Interactome Study
The interactions between viral and host proteins are believed to play fundamental roles in the
virus lifecycle. It is reasonable to speculate that drugs targeting host proteins may inhibit the
functions of host protein complexes and/or disrupt their interactions with viral proteins, which
may lead to failure of the virus lifecycle. Therefore, we analyzed potential drug targets and
drugs using bioinformatics tools, Metascape 65 or Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Of the 29 viral
proteins and 437 SARS-CoV-2 and host HCIPs, we found 18 viral proteins with 60 host
interaction proteins that could be targeted by various drugs (Figure 4 and Table S3). Of these
potentially drugs targets, some well-studied drugs are available and/or being developed.
SIGMAR1, which binds to NSP6, was tested as an important drug target candidate for the
treatment of COVID-19 3. Many of our candidate proteins are well studied as drug targets, such
as DHFR and VDAC1/VDAC2, which interact with NSP6; GSK3B, which interacts with N
protein; FLT4, which interacts with M protein; EGFR, ERBB2, and ERBB4, which interact with
ORF7b; A2M, which interacts with S protein; and ANXA5, which interacts with NSP15. Multiple
drugs targeting these host proteins have been developed, which should facilitate the testing and
developing treatments for COVID-19 patients. Two potential drugs proposed in our study were
tested with real-world COVID-19 treatment, haloperidol (SIGMAR1 antagonist) and tamoxifer
(ERBB2/ERBB4 inhibitor) (Figure 4). And they both showed effectiveness against COVID-19 6.

Comparison of Coronavirus-Host Interaction Networks among Human Coronaviruses
Seven human coronaviruses have been reported since the first one, HCoV-OC43, was identified
in the mid-1960s. Four of these coronaviruses cause mild to moderate symptoms, including

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

HCoV-OC43, HCoV-HKU1, HCoV-NL63, and HCoV-229E. The other three coronaviruses,
SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV-1, and MERS-CoV, can cause more serious, even fatal diseases. To
understand the overlap and divergence of virus-host interactions among these human
coronaviruses, we selected two viral gene products, NSP1 and N protein, for comparison.
These two viral proteins also significantly suppress the host antiviral IFN pathway as shown in
Figure S2. These comparisons were meant to identify potential targets that could be used for
pan-viral treatment against currently known coronaviruses and any new coronaviruses identified
in the future. The comparisons may also reveal different mechanisms adopted by each
coronavirus for its viral lifecycle and associated pathologic symptoms.

Comparison of NSP1 Interactomes among All Seven Human Coronaviruses
NSP1 is arguably the most important pathogenic determinant of human coronaviruses, because
it induces a near-complete suppression of host gene expression 66. NSP1 uses a two-pronged
strategy for this host gene suppression, i.e., stalling canonical mRNA translation and triggering
the degradation of host mRNAs 67. NSP1 also suppresses host antiviral gene expression, which
inhibits the host antiviral defense systems and therefore facilitates viral replication and immune
evasion 68. NSP1 proteins from two alpha coronaviruses, CoV-229E and CoV-NL63, are shorter
than those from the other five beta coronaviruses (Figure 5A). Most coronavirus NSP1 proteins
share low sequence identity, i.e., 10% to 20%, except for SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-1, which
have a shared sequence identity of 84.4% (Figure S3A). However, all of these NSP1 proteins
have similar functions in suppressing host gene expression and inhibiting the host antiviral
system, such as IFN signaling (Figures S3B and S3C).
We expressed all seven human coronavirus NSP1 proteins in HEK293T cells and
performed both SFB-TAP (Figure S3D) and BioID2 labeling (Figures S3E and S3F)
experiments to uncover the protein-protein interaction networks between NSP1 and host
proteins, following a similar strategy as described in the SARS-CoV-2 interactome analysis

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

presented in Figure 1. To compare all HCIPs among different human coronavirus strains, we
first identified proteins for each coronavirus NSP1 with a SAINTexpress Bayesian false
discovery rate ≤0.01 in at least one of the seven coronavirus NSP1 interactions. Using these
HCIPs, we identified all PSMs captured for that prey in the raw identification data for each
coronavirus NSP1 (Table S4 and S5). Principal component analysis grouped SARS-CoV-2 and
SARS-CoV-1 together (Figure 5B), indicating that these two viruses with high NSP1 sequence
identity share similar interactomes and may adopt similar mechanisms to suppress host gene
expression. The protein-protein interaction network of NSP1 in the seven human coronaviruses
was built in Figure S3G.
Although many of these NSP1 proteins have limited sequence identity, we uncovered
subsets of shared HCIPs across all seven human coronavirus NSP1 interactomes. In BioID2MS analysis, we identified the EIF3 complex, including eight of the thirteen subunits in our
NSP1 HCIP list (Figure 5C). The EIF3 complex stimulates nearly all steps of translation
initiation and is essential for most forms of cap-dependent and cap-independent translation
initiation 18. In our TAP-MS analysis, a translation initiation factor, EIF4G2, was identified in all
seven coronavirus NSP1 interactomes (Figure 5D). When the cell is infected by coronavirus,
the viral NSP1 protein may recognize translation initiation factors and suppress almost all
translation activities of the host cell, which may be similar to the situations reported for human
immunodeficiency virus and other important human pathogens 19. Additionally, several other
transcription and translation regulators, such as BCLAF1, TDRD3, SSRP1, SMG6, and DIS3L2,
were identified across all seven coronavirus NSP1 interactomes. The analysis of common
NSP1-binding partners across all seven coronaviruses may explain why NSP1 proteins with
only 10% to 20% sequence identity have similar functions in suppressing host gene expression.
In addition, these common HCIPs may represent potential drug targets against all human
coronaviruses, including any identified in the future.

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

In contrast to the common HCIPs for all coronaviruses, some HCIPs were unique or
showed significantly higher binding signals to NSP1 from one or several coronaviruses. For
example, the subunits of DNA polymerase alpha-primase complex, POLA1, POLA2, PRIM1,
and PRIM2, were identified with NSP1 of SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2, which was reported
recently 6. However, there was no or weak signal of this complex in other coronavirus NSP1
interactomes (Figures 5C and 5D). We identified more than 500 PSMs for both PYCR1 and
PYCR2 in SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-1 purifications (Figure 5D), indicating that these two
viruses have some unique mechanisms. We further confirmed the SARS-CoV-2 and SARSCoV-1 NSP1-PYCR1/PYCR2 protein-protein interaction by immunoblotting (Figure 5E).
PYCR1/PYCR2 proteins catalyze the last step in proline biosynthesis. This process is critical for
tumorigenesis 69,70 and may be hijacked by human herpesvirus for tumorigenesis 71. The
functional significance of NSP1-PYCR1/PYCR2 interaction in viral lifecycle warrants further
investigation.
Additionally, one group of proteins was identified only in HCoV-229E and HCoV-OC43
NSP1 purifications (Figure 5C); these proteins include the DNA topoisomerase subunits TOP2A
and TOP2B, global transcription activators SMARCA1 and SMARCA5, and other transcription
or translation regulators (SUPT16H, PSIP1, MACROH2A1, MACROH2A2, PUM3, and BAZ1B).
An RNA-mediated gene silencing component, AGO3, was identified in several coronaviruses,
but with much higher signal in HCoV-HKU1 (Figure 5D). Another protein, RIPK1, which is a key
regulator of tumor necrosis factor–mediated apoptosis, necroptosis, and inflammatory
pathways, was also identified as binding with all seven human coronavirus NSP1 proteins, but
the strongest interaction was in HCoV-HKU1. Both AGO3 and RIPK1 play a role in NF-kappaB
signaling, which may regulate NF-kappaB activation, constituting a major antiviral immune
pathway 72. A general transcription and DNA repair factor, IIH core complex, was identified as
uniquely binding to HCoV-229E; we identified several of its subunits, including GTF2H1,
GTF2H2, GTF2H4, ERCC3, and ERCC5 (Figure 5D). DICER1, which plays a central role in

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

post-transcriptional gene silencing and exogenous RNA degradation, was identified with
significantly higher PSMs in HCoV-OC43, HCoV-HKU1, and HCoV-NL63 than in the other
coronaviruses (Figure 5D). Together, these findings suggest that different and unique
mechanisms may be utilized by each coronavirus after infection to suppress host gene
expression. These differences in NSP1 interactomes may also explain why different
coronaviruses have different symptoms in humans.

Comparison of N Protein Interactomes among Human Coronaviruses
SARS-CoV-2 N protein is the first released and most abundant protein during viral infection. N
protein has several key functions that help viral transcription, translation, genome replication,
and packaging before budding. N protein is also one of the key molecules that the virus uses to
fight against host antiviral systems. We investigated the interactomes of N protein in different
coronaviruses using the same strategy as described above for the study of NSP1 (Figure 6A).
Most of the N proteins in different human coronaviruses had sequence identity percentages
between 20% and 30%, but the sequence identity was 89.1% between SARS-CoV-2 and
SARS-CoV-1 (Figure S4A).
In the interactome analysis of all SARS-CoV-2 coding genes, we identified the most
HCIPs with N protein as bait, as shown in Figure 2. Among the 102 HCIPs identified, we found
that 100 of them were identified by SFB-TAP. Therefore, we focused on SFB-TAP for all seven
human coronaviruses. We expressed all seven human coronavirus N proteins in HEK293T cells
and performed SFB-TAP (Figure S4B), and then we built the protein-protein interaction network
of N proteins in the seven human coronaviruses (Figure S4C). Similar to the analysis of NSP1
interactomes, we performed a principal component analysis (Figure 6B) and generated a heat
map of the N protein interactomes in different coronaviruses (Figure 6C and Table S6). Most of
the strong binding HCIPs were shared among all coronaviruses, and a large portion of the

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

shared HCIPs play a role in RNA processing, ribosome biogenesis, and translation regulation
(Figure 6D).
We tested IFN signaling suppression by N proteins of all seven human coronaviruses.
Our results indicated only SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-1 N proteins suppressed the activation
of IFN-signaling significantly (Figures 7A and 7B). We analyzed N proteins interacting proteins,
and found two differential interacting proteins in the N protein interactomes among human
coronaviruses is G3BP1 and G3BP2. As shown in Figures 6C and 7C, we recovered around
400 PSMs for these two preys in the purification of SARS-CoV-2 N protein, which was several
times higher than those in MERS-CoV and other four common human coronaviruses. We
confirmed these bindings with immunoblotting (Figure 7D). G3BP1 and G3BP2 bind more
strongly with the N proteins from SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-1 than with the N proteins from
other human coronaviruses, and the binding to MERS N protein was the weakest. G3BP1 and
G3BP2 are important for innate immunity, as described above. We suspect that the binding
affinity between N proteins and G3BP1/G3BP2 may in part contribute to the inhibition of the
host antiviral system and lead to differences in the contagiousness of these viral pathogens.

DISSUSION
In the current study, we generated a comprehensive host-virus protein-protein interaction
network of SARS-CoV-2 by identifying HCIPs using two different interactome approaches, i.e.,
TAP-MS and BioID2-MS. We identified a total of 437 HCIPs that bind to one or several of the
SARS-CoV-2 genes. These findings not only validate several known protein-protein interactions
but also identify many new protein-protein interactions with potential functions in the SARSCoV-2 lifecycle. This dataset reveals new mechanistic insights into the diverse functions of
SARS-CoV-2 genes, which need to be further investigated. Moreover, this dataset suggests
potential drug targets for the treatment of COVID-19.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

We identified 314 HCIPs from TAP-MS experiments and 130 HCIPs using the BioID2MS strategy. Surprisingly, we found that only seven proteins overlapped between these two
methods, as shown in Figure S5A. When we examined the details of the HCIP lists, we found
that the TAP and BioID2 methods have their own biases. The TAP method is effective in
identifying HCIPs for soluble proteins, whereas BioID2 facilitates the detection of binding
partners of baits with transmembrane domains, which is similar to previous studies using this
method 4. In our SARS-CoV-2 interactome results, we identified many HCIPs for three baits
when using the BioID2 method. All three proteins are predicted to have multiple transmembrane
domains according to our analysis using TMHMM, i.e., NSP3 (four domains), M (three
domains), and ORF3a (three domains). However, for the baits with only one predicted or known
transmembrane domain, such as S, E, and ORF7b protein, our TAP method worked efficiently.
Another possible explanation for the difference between the TAP and BioID2 methods
may be influence from the data obtained and the subsequent data analysis. Because the TAP
method employs TAP, whereas BioID2 uses one-step purification with streptavidin beads, we
uncovered much shorter raw protein/peptide lists with the TAP-MS method, which allowed the
MS instrument to capture much more PSMs for each HCIP. For example, the ORF9a–TOMM70
interaction was uncovered as an HCIP by both methods. However, we detected an average of
1518 PSMs of TOMM70 from three biological replicates in our TAP-MS experiments, but only
an average of 31 PSMs in the BioID2-MS study. Our current data analysis of HCIPs may not be
adequate to deal with this technical issue, because it is challenging to distinguish true binding
partners from contaminants in a long raw protein/peptide list with few prey PSMs for each
protein. The third explanation for differences between the two methods is the restriction of
BioID2 or any other proximity-labeling method, which limits the coverage of binding partners
located beyond the small labeling reaction range. The overlap between the interactomes
revealed by different strategies is quite low 6,73 (Figure S4B). This is still a common issue in

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

protein-protein interaction studies, and it may due to the purification strategy, experimental
design, and/or data filtration/analysis.
We built a host-virus protein-protein interaction network of SARS-CoV-2 based on the
437 HCIPs identified in the current study. It may suggest how these viral proteins participate in
the virus lifecycle. M protein, NSP6, ORF3a, ORF6, and ORF7b help viral infection, trafficking,
and maybe the budding of the virion; NSP1, NSP3, NSP5, NSP6, NSP7, and N protein
suppress host cell replication, transcription, and translation, and at the same time contribute to
the same processes in the viral lifecycle; S protein facilitates the formation of new viruses after
viral replication and translation of structural proteins; NSP1, NSP5, N protein, M protein, and
ORF7 may inhibit host cell antiviral responses and therefore promote the survival of the infected
virus, and they also prolong host cell survival to increase viral production. NSP6 and NSP7 may
manipulate host cell metabolism and signaling transduction pathways. Understanding in detail
how the virus and host cell communicate will help us to find or design therapeutic strategies to
suppress viral infection.
Additionally, we compared NSP1 and N protein interactomes among different human
coronaviruses. These comparisons expand our knowledge of these viruses. Although NSP1 and
N proteins from different coronaviruses share limited sequence identity, they have many
common host binding partners, which match their biological functions. Such as the suppression
of host gene expression by NSP1 proteins may be mediated through their binding to the EIF
complex. The regulation of viral replication, transcription, and translation in all human
coronaviruses may through the interaction between N protein and host ribosomal proteins or
proteins involved in ribosomal biogenesis. Besides these common interaction proteins, we also
uncovered some host proteins have different interaction ability among the seven human
coronaviruses, and this may explain differing pathogenesis patterns among the coronaviruses.
We identified and validated strong interactions between the N proteins of SARS-CoV-2 and
SARS-CoV-1 with host G3BP1 or G3BP2, two proteins that are known to be involved in innate

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

immunity. These strong interactions may indicate that N proteins in SARS-CoV-1/2 may
suppress the host antiviral response and improve viral infection. Therefore, SARS-CoV-2 and
SARS-CoV-1 may be more contagious than other coronaviruses.
In conclusion, our systemic study of the SARS-CoV-2 protein-protein interaction network
provides useful data on viral gene/protein functions and potential underlying mechanisms, which
could lead to the identification of new drug targets for the treatment of COVID-19. The
comparison of interactomes among different human coronaviruses elucidated the common and
different strategies these human coronaviruses may employ to manipulate host cells and
maximize viral infection/production. These findings will benefit our current fight against COVID19 and also suggest ways to combat any future coronavirus-caused diseases.

MATERIALS and METHODS
Plasmids, Cell Culture, and Transfection
The cDNAs of viral genes were synthesized using Integrated DNA Technologies or Twist
Bioscience, or ordered from Addgene, and subcloned into pDONOR201 vector as entry clones.
Then the entry clones were recombined into a lentiviral-gateway–compatible destination vector
to express the fusion proteins with SFB or BioID2 tag.
HEK293T and U2OS cell lines were purchased from American Type Culture Collection.
They were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, and cultured at
37 °C in 5% CO2 (v/v).
Recombined destination vector with SFB- or BioID2-fused viral genes were transfected
into HEK293T or U2OS cells with polyethyleneimine reagent (Fisher Scientific). After selection
with 2 μg/ml puromycin (Life Technologies), the stable clones were picked and validated by
Western blot analysis. The exception is the viral gene NSP1: destination vectors with NSP1
(SFB-NSP1 and BioID2-NSP1) were transfected into HEK293T cells 36 hours before cell
harvest using the reagent X-tremeGENE HP DNA Transfection Reagent (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

expressing the BioID2-tagged genes were treated with 50mM biotin for 18 hours and then
harvested. Vector-transfected cells or cells expressing GFP were used as controls, which were
processed along with these experiments. Three biological replicates were performed for each
SFB- or BioID2-tagged gene or negative control.

SFB-TAP and BioID2 Assays
Pellets of cells expressing SFB- or BioID2-tagged viral genes were subjected to lysis with NETN
buffer (100mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 20mM Tris-HCl, and 0.5% Nonidet P-40) with protease
inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) at 4 °C for 20 minutes. After centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 20
minutes at 4 °C, the supernatant was incubated with streptavidin-conjugated beads (Fisher
Scientific) for 2 hours at 4 °C. Then the beads were washed with NETN buffer four times. The
BioID2-tagged samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE, and the gel was fixed and stained with
Coomassie brilliant blue. Then the whole lane of the sample in the gel was excised and
subjected to MS analysis. The SFB-tagged samples were eluted by 2 mg/ml biotin for 1 hour at
4 °C. The elutes were incubated with S-protein agarose (VWR International) for 2 hours. After
four washings with NETN buffer, the beads were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Coomassie
brilliant blue staining, as with the BioID2 samples.

Mass Spectrometry Analysis
The samples in gel were excised and de-stained completely before digestion. In-gel digestion
was performed with trypsin (V5280, Promega Corporation) in 50mM NH4HCO3 at 37 °C
overnight. The extracted peptides were vacuum-dried and then reconstituted in the MS loading
solution (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid).
The MS sample was loaded onto nano-reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography
and eluted with acetonitrile gradient from 5% to 35% for 60 minutes at a flow rate of 300
nL/minute. The elute was analyzed by the Q Exactive HF MS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific)

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

with positive ion mode and in a data-dependent manner, one full scan followed by up to 20
MS/MS scans. The full MS scan was performed with a scanning range of 350-1200 m/z and
resolution at 60,000 at m/z 400.
The raw MS data were submitted to Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) using Proteome
Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The database used for searching was Homo sapiens
downloaded from Uniprot (July 2020). The sequences of SARS-CoV-2 genes, SFB tag, and
BioID2 tag were added into the database with 20,414 entries in total. Oxidation for methionine
and carboxyamidomethyl for cysteine were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerance
for precursor was 10 ppm, and for product ion, 0.02 Da. Tolerance of two missed cleavages of
trypsin was applied. Common contaminant proteins were removed from the identification list.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange
Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD023209.

High-Confidence Interacting Proteins
The identified protein lists were applied to a filtration strategy by comparing with lists obtained
from controls to uncover HCIPs. We used SAINTexpress (version 3.6.3) to compare samples
with the controls, which included the results from SFB-TAP or BioID2 experiments using the
bait, vector, GFP control, and purification results with other virus genes, except the one we were
analyzing. For the SARS-CoV-2 HCIPs analysis, we selected the proteins with SAINTexpress
Bayesian false-discovery rate ≤0.05 as our virus interactome HCIPs. The host-virus interactome
network was generated by Cytoscape and based on these HCIPs. Functional characterization
was carried out by Metascape 65 or Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Qiagen).

Pulldown and Western Blot Analysis
To validate the interaction between host and viral gene products, we transfected HEK293T cells
with constructs encoding SFB-tagged viral genes using polyethyleneimine reagent. Cells were

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

collected and subjected to lysis buffer (NETN buffer) on ice for 20 minutes. The cell lysates
were collected and centrifuged. Supernatants were incubated with S-protein beads for 2 hours
at 4 °C. After three washings with NETN buffer, samples were boiled in 2× Laemmli buffer and
the Western blot analysis was conducted with antibodies as indicated in the figures.

Immunofluorescent Staining
Immunofluorescent staining was performed following the method described in our previous
study 74. U2OS cells were cultured on coverslips overnight and then transfected with construct
encoding SARS-CoV-2 viral gene or vector control. Twenty hours after transfection, cells were
fixed in 3% paraformaldehyde for 10 minutes and extracted with a 0.5% Triton X-100 solution
for 5 minutes. After blocking with 1% bovine serum albumin, cells were incubated with the
indicated primary antibodies for 1 hour and washed three times before incubation with
fluorescein isothiocyanate– or rhodamine-conjugated second primary antibodies (1:3000
dilution; Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories) for 1 hour. The coverslips were mounted onto
glass slides with ProLong gold antifade reagent with DAPI (Cell Signaling Technology) and
visualized with a fluorescent microscope.

Luciferase Reporter Assay
The luciferase reporter assay followed a previous study 75. Viral proteins were overexpressed in
HEK293T cells along with IFN-beta-luciferase or 5× ISRE-Luc reporter, and with the pRL-Luc
with Renilla luciferase as the internal control. Cells were lysed with passive lysis buffer
(Promega), and we performed the luciferase assays using a dual-luciferase assay kit (Promega)
and quantified them with Monolight 3010 (Becton Dickinson).

Statistical Analysis

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Each experiment was repeated three times or more unless otherwise noted. Differences
between groups were analyzed using the Student t test or two-way analysis of variance with the
Tukey multiple comparisons test. P values less than 0.05 were considered statistically
significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Drs. Peihui Wang and Yuan Wang for their kind help. We thank Erica Goodoff and the
Research Medical Library at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center for editing the
manuscript. This work was supported in part by startup and internal funds from MD Anderson
Cancer Center to J.C. J.C. also received support from the Pamela and Wayne Garrison
Distinguished Chair in Cancer Research. This work was also supported in part by the National
Institutes of Health through Cancer Center Support Grant P30CA016672. In addition, JC
receives support from Cancer Prevention & Research Institute of Texas award (RP160667 and
RP180813) and NIH (P01CA193124, R01CA210929, R01CA216437 and R01 CA216911).

AUTOHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, Z.C. and J.C.; Methodology, Z.C., C.W., X.F., and J.C.; Investigation, Z.C.,
C.W., and X.F.; Validation, Z.C., C.W., and X.F.; Resources, L.N., M.T., H.Z., Y.X., S.K.S., and
M.S.; Writing Original Draft, Z.C. and J.C.; Review and Editing, all authors; Supervision, J.C.

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

FIGURE LEGENDS
Figure 1. Summary of the SFB-TAP and BioID2 interactome experiments. (A) SARS-CoV-2
genome annotation, predicting 29 virus gene products. The 16 non-structure proteins (NSPs)
are cleaved products of the large polyprotein open reading frame (ORF)1ab or ORF1a. These
polyproteins are cleaved into small function fragments or NSPs after translation. (B) Workflow
for the comprehensive virus-host interactome analysis. Two different labeling strategies, SFBTAP and BioID2 labeling, were applied in the study. Samples were analyzed by Q Exactive HF
mass spectrometry (MS). (C) Summary of the datasets obtained from SFB-TAP and BioID2
results, including the number of high-confidence interacting proteins (HCIPs). BDFR, Bayesian
false discovery rate. (D) Pearson correlation coefficient among three independent biological
replicates of the SFB-TAP results and the BioID2 labeling experiments. (E-G) GO analysis. GO
enrichment was performed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Protein localization (E), molecular
function (F), and biological function (G) are plotted in a single panel. (H) HCIPs identified in the
purification of each SARS-CoV-2 gene. (I) Correlation between peptide-spectrum matches
(PSMs) of identified proteins and their fold change calculated by SAINTexpress.

Figure 2. Interactomes between SARS-CoV-2 and human proteins. A protein-protein
interaction network between 29 viral proteins of SARS-CoV-2 and the host proteins is shown for
437 pairs of host-virus interactions. The red diamonds are virus proteins (NSP, non-structure
protein), green circles are the high-confidence interacting proteins (HCIPs) identified from SFBtandem affinity purification experiments, yellow circles are the HCIPs identified from BioID2
labeling assays, and grey rounded rectangles are groups of proteins belonging to the same
protein complex or from the same pathway. The italic text are the functional characterizations
analyzed with Metascape and reference mining.

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3. Validation of selected host-virus protein-protein interactions. (A) Pulldown and
Western blot analysis validated the interaction between the viral protein ORF3a and its
interactors, VPS11 and CLCC1. HEK293T cells with SFB-tagged ORF3a expression were
collected and lysed. Cell lysates were subjected to pulldown assay using S-protein beads.
Western blot analysis was conducted with the indicated antibodies. Cells transfected with vector
or construct encoding GFP or ORF9b were included as controls in these experiments. (B)
Immunostaining analysis of protein localization. U2OS cells were transfected with construct
encoding ORF3a. Cells were fixed and stained with the indicated antibodies. The green signal is
CLCC1, the red signal is flag (for SFB-ORF3a), and the blue signal indicates DAPI/nuclei. Scale
bar: 10 µm. (C) Pulldown and Western blot validation of the interaction between SARS-CoV-2 S
protein and the human signal peptidase complex. Cells transfected with vector or construct
encoding GFP or ORF9b were included as controls in these experiments.

Figure 4. Potential drugs targeting SARS-CoV-2 and host protein interaction. The drughuman target network was analyzed by Metascape and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis/GO
analysis. The red diamonds are virus proteins, green circles are the high-confidence interactive
proteins that were identified as drug targets, and red text lists potential drugs. Proteins in the
blue rounded rectangles belong to the complex or functional pathway targeted by the same
drugs.

Figure 5. Comparison of interactomes of seven NSP1 proteins from seven human
coronaviruses. (A) Comparisons of NSP1 proteins from seven human coronaviruses. (B)
Principal component analysis of the seven HCIP lists with bait NSP1 from different human
coronaviruses. (C, D) Heat map of the NSP1 HCIPs obtained using (C) BioID2 and (D) SFBTAP. NSP1 HCIPs were compared among seven human coronaviruses using the preys’
spectral counts. Three areas of the heat map in (C) are enlarged and labeled as (a), (b), and (c).

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Five areas of the heat map in (D) are enlarged and labeled as (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5).
Functional characterization of each protein is shown with the red circles below the enlarged
images. (E) Pulldown and Western blot validation of the interaction between human coronavirus
NSP1 proteins and the human proteins PYCR1/PYCR2. Cells transfected with vector or
construct encoding GFP were included as controls in these experiments.

Figure 6. Comparison of interactomes of N proteins from different human coronaviruses.
(A) Comparison of N proteins from seven human coronaviruses. (B) Principal component
analysis of the seven high-confidence interacting protein (HCIP) lists with bait N protein from
different human coronaviruses. (C) Heat map of the N protein HCIPs identified by SFB-tandem
affinity purification. N protein HCIPs were compared among seven human coronaviruses using
the preys’ spectral counts. Three areas of the heat map are enlarged and labeled as (1), (2),
and (3). Functional characterization for each protein is shown with the red circles below the
enlarged images. (D) The human proteins which binding to N proteins of human coronaviruses
were integrated and analyzed by STRING to illustrate the protein-protein interaction among the
HCIPs. The minimum required interaction score setting in STRING is 0.9. Different function
group or complex were colored differently. The cycles are proteins, and the lines are the
interactions.

Figure 7. SARS-CoV-2 N protein interacts with G3BP1/G3BP2, which may in part
contribute to fighting the host antiviral system. (A, B) Interferon (IFN) signaling assay for N
proteins of seven human coronaviruses. (A) Analysis of IFN-beta-luciferase reporter 12 hours
after Sendai virus infection. (B) Analysis of ISRE luciferase reporter when the viral proteins were
co-expressed with IRF3. Graphs show mean ± SD, n = 3. ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01 and *p < 0.05
(Student’s t-test). (C) Spectra counts of G3BP1/G3BP2 identification in purifications with N
proteins from different human coronaviruses as baits. PSM, peptide-spectrum match. (D)

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Pulldown and Western blot validation of the interaction between N protein and G3BP1/G3BP2.
Cells transfected with vector or construct encoding GFP or N protein from different human
coronaviruses were compared in these experiments.

Supplemental Figure Legends
Figure S1, related to Figure 1. Validation of SARS-CoV-2 protein expression. (A) Twentynine SARS-CoV-2 genes with the SFB tag were expressed in cells. Cells transfected with vector
or construct encoding SFB-tagged GFP were included as controls. (B) Twenty-nine SARS-CoV2 genes with the second-generation biotin ligase (BioID2) tag were expressed in cells.
Untransfected cells, cells transfected with vector, and cells transfected with construct encoding
GFP tagged with BioID2 were included as controls. (C) Validation of the BioID2 labeling with
staining of the streptavidin antibody.

Figure S2, related to Figure 1. Interferon (IFN) signaling assay for SARS-CoV-2 coding
genes. (A) Analysis of IFN-beta-luciferase reporter 12 hours after Sendai virus (SeV) infection.
(B) Analysis of ISRE-luciferase reporter when the viral proteins were co-expressed with IRF3.
Graphs show mean ± SD, n = 3. **p < 0.01 and *p < 0.05 (Student’s t-test).

Figure S3, related to Figure 5. Comparison of interactomes of seven NSP1 proteins from
seven human coronaviruses. (A) Sequence identity comparison of NSP1 proteins from seven
human coronaviruses. (B, C) Interferon (IFN) signaling assay for NSP1 of seven human
coronaviruses. (B) Ana
lysis of IFN-beta-luciferase reporter 12 hours after Sendai virus infection. (C) Analysis of ISRE
luciferase reporter when the viral proteins were co-expressed with IRF3. Graphs show mean ±
SD, n = 3. ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01 and *p < 0.05 (Student’s t-test). (D) Expression validation of
NSP1 with the SFB tag from different human coronaviruses. (E) Expression validation of NSP1

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

with BioID2 tag from different human coronaviruses. (F) Validation of labeling efficiency for the
BioID2-tagged gene products. (G) Network of high-confidence interactive proteins (green
circles) identified with seven NSP1 proteins (red diamonds).

Figure S4, related to Figure 6. Comparison of interactomes of seven N proteins from
seven human coronaviruses. (A) Sequence identity comparison of N proteins from seven
human coronaviruses. (B) Expression validation of NSP1 with the SFB tag from different human
coronaviruses. (C) Network of high-confidence interactive proteins (green circles) identified with
seven NSP1 proteins (red diamonds).

Figure S5. Overlap of high-confidence interacting proteins (HCIPs) from different
datasets. (A) Overlap of HCIPs identified from SFB-tandem affinity purification and secondgeneration biotin ligase (BioID2) labeling experiments. (B) Overlap of HCIPs reported previously
and those identified in the current study.

Supplemental Table Legends
Table S1, related to Figure 1. Raw identifications of all SFB-TAP and BioID2 purifications.
Table S2, related to Figure 1. HCIPs of SFB-TAP and BioID2 purifications.
Table S3, related to Figure 4. Drugs target human proteins which binding to SARS-CoV-2
viral proteins.
Table S4, related to Figure 5. NSP1 interactomes raw identifications and HCIPs of all
seven human coronaviruses using SFB-TAP purification.
Table S5, related to Figure 5. NSP1 interactomes raw identifications and HCIPs of all
seven human coronaviruses using BioID2 purification.
Table S6, related to Figures 6 and 7. N proteins interactomes raw identifications and
HCIPs of all seven human coronaviruses using SFB-TAP purification.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

REFERENCES
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

Wu, F. et al. A new coronavirus associated with human respiratory disease in China. Nature 579,
265-269, doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2008-3 (2020).
Lu, R. et al. Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus: implications
for virus origins and receptor binding. Lancet 395, 565-574, doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30251-8
(2020).
Gordon, D. E. et al. A SARS-CoV-2 protein interaction map reveals targets for drug repurposing.
Nature 583, 459-468, doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2286-9 (2020).
Smits, A. H. & Vermeulen, M. Characterizing Protein-Protein Interactions Using Mass
Spectrometry: Challenges and Opportunities. Trends Biotechnol 34, 825-834,
doi:10.1016/j.tibtech.2016.02.014 (2016).
Teo, G. et al. SAINTexpress: improvements and additional features in Significance Analysis of
INTeractome software. J Proteomics 100, 37-43, doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2013.10.023 (2014).
Gordon, D. E. et al. Comparative host-coronavirus protein interaction networks reveal pan-viral
disease mechanisms. Science, doi:10.1126/science.abe9403 (2020).
Garrus, J. E. et al. Tsg101 and the vacuolar protein sorting pathway are essential for HIV-1 budding.
Cell 107, 55-65, doi:10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00506-2 (2001).
Corona, A. K., Saulsbery, H. M., Corona Velazquez, A. F. & Jackson, W. T. Enteroviruses Remodel
Autophagic Trafficking through Regulation of Host SNARE Proteins to Promote Virus Replication
and Cell Exit. Cell Rep 22, 3304-3314, doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.003 (2018).
Sivan, G., Weisberg, A. S., Americo, J. L. & Moss, B. Retrograde Transport from Early Endosomes
to the trans-Golgi Network Enables Membrane Wrapping and Egress of Vaccinia Virus Virions. J
Virol 90, 8891-8905, doi:10.1128/JVI.01114-16 (2016).
Solinger, J. A. & Spang, A. Tethering complexes in the endocytic pathway: CORVET and HOPS. FEBS
J 280, 2743-2757, doi:10.1111/febs.12151 (2013).
Mancias, J. D. & Goldberg, J. Structural basis of cargo membrane protein discrimination by the
human COPII coat machinery. EMBO J 27, 2918-2928, doi:10.1038/emboj.2008.208 (2008).
Zhang, J. et al. A systemic and molecular study of subcellular localization of SARS-CoV-2 proteins.
Signal Transduct Target Ther 5, 269, doi:10.1038/s41392-020-00372-8 (2020).
Igloi, Z., Mohl, B. P., Lippiat, J. D., Harris, M. & Mankouri, J. Requirement for chloride channel
function during the hepatitis C virus life cycle. J Virol 89, 4023-4029, doi:10.1128/JVI.02946-14
(2015).
Muller, M. et al. Chikungunya virus requires cellular chloride channels for efficient genome
replication. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 13, e0007703, doi:10.1371/journal.pntd.0007703 (2019).
Tohya, Y. et al. Suppression of host gene expression by nsp1 proteins of group 2 bat coronaviruses.
J Virol 83, 5282-5288, doi:10.1128/JVI.02485-08 (2009).
Lokugamage, K. G., Narayanan, K., Huang, C. & Makino, S. Severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus protein nsp1 is a novel eukaryotic translation inhibitor that represses multiple steps
of translation initiation. J Virol 86, 13598-13608, doi:10.1128/JVI.01958-12 (2012).
Kamitani, W. et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nsp1 protein suppresses host
gene expression by promoting host mRNA degradation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103, 12885-12890,
doi:10.1073/pnas.0603144103 (2006).
Hinnebusch, A. G. eIF3: a versatile scaffold for translation initiation complexes. Trends Biochem
Sci 31, 553-562, doi:10.1016/j.tibs.2006.08.005 (2006).
Jager, S. et al. Global landscape of HIV-human protein complexes. Nature 481, 365-370,
doi:10.1038/nature10719 (2011).

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38

Oppikofer, M. et al. Expansion of the ISWI chromatin remodeler family with new active complexes.
EMBO Rep 18, 1697-1706, doi:10.15252/embr.201744011 (2017).
Cheng, E. et al. Characterization of the Interaction between hantavirus nucleocapsid protein (N)
and ribosomal protein S19 (RPS19). J Biol Chem 286, 11814-11824, doi:10.1074/jbc.M110.210179
(2011).
Li, S., Li, X. & Zhou, Y. Ribosomal protein L18 is an essential factor that promote rice stripe virus
accumulation
in
small
brown
planthopper.
Virus
Res
247,
15-20,
doi:10.1016/j.virusres.2018.01.011 (2018).
Fernandez, M. N., Munoz-Olivas, R. & Luque-Garcia, J. L. SILAC-based quantitative proteomics
identifies size-dependent molecular mechanisms involved in silver nanoparticles-induced toxicity.
Nanotoxicology 13, 812-826, doi:10.1080/17435390.2019.1579374 (2019).
Chen, W. & Dittmer, D. P. Ribosomal protein S6 interacts with the latency-associated nuclear
antigen of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus. J Virol 85, 9495-9505, doi:10.1128/JVI.0262010 (2011).
Weinlich, S. et al. IGF2BP1 enhances HCV IRES-mediated translation initiation via the 3'UTR. RNA
15, 1528-1542, doi:10.1261/rna.1578409 (2009).
Zhang, R. et al. A CRISPR screen defines a signal peptide processing pathway required by
flaviviruses. Nature 535, 164-168, doi:10.1038/nature18625 (2016).
Ma, L. et al. Host Factor SPCS1 Regulates the Replication of Japanese Encephalitis Virus through
Interactions with Transmembrane Domains of NS2B. J Virol 92, doi:10.1128/JVI.00197-18 (2018).
Suzuki, R. et al. Signal peptidase complex subunit 1 participates in the assembly of hepatitis C virus
through an interaction with E2 and NS2. PLoS Pathog 9, e1003589,
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1003589 (2013).
Ma, H. et al. A CRISPR-Based Screen Identifies Genes Essential for West-Nile-Virus-Induced Cell
Death. Cell Rep 12, 673-683, doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2015.06.049 (2015).
Savidis, G. et al. Identification of Zika Virus and Dengue Virus Dependency Factors using Functional
Genomics. Cell Rep 16, 232-246, doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2016.06.028 (2016).
Li, Q. et al. A genome-wide genetic screen for host factors required for hepatitis C virus
propagation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106, 16410-16415, doi:10.1073/pnas.0907439106 (2009).
Zhang, Z. J. et al. CCR4, a RNA decay factor, is hijacked by a plant cytorhabdovirus phosphoprotein
to facilitate virus replication. Elife 9, doi:10.7554/eLife.53753 (2020).
Jackson, B. R. et al. An interaction between KSHV ORF57 and UIF provides mRNA-adaptor
redundancy in herpesvirus intronless mRNA export. PLoS Pathog 7, e1002138,
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002138 (2011).
Schumann, S., Jackson, B. R., Baquero-Perez, B. & Whitehouse, A. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus ORF57 protein: exploiting all stages of viral mRNA processing. Viruses 5, 1901-1923,
doi:10.3390/v5081901 (2013).
Dufu, K. et al. ATP is required for interactions between UAP56 and two conserved mRNA export
proteins, Aly and CIP29, to assemble the TREX complex. Genes Dev 24, 2043-2053,
doi:10.1101/gad.1898610 (2010).
Chambers, J. W., Maguire, T. G. & Alwine, J. C. Glutamine metabolism is essential for human
cytomegalovirus infection. J Virol 84, 1867-1873, doi:10.1128/JVI.02123-09 (2010).
Ripoli, M. et al. Hepatitis C virus-linked mitochondrial dysfunction promotes hypoxia-inducible
factor 1 alpha-mediated glycolytic adaptation. J Virol 84, 647-660, doi:10.1128/JVI.00769-09
(2010).
Zamarin, D., Garcia-Sastre, A., Xiao, X., Wang, R. & Palese, P. Influenza virus PB1-F2 protein
induces cell death through mitochondrial ANT3 and VDAC1. PLoS Pathog 1, e4,
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.0010004 (2005).

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57

Han, C. et al. Voltage-Dependent Anion Channel 1 Interacts with Ribonucleoprotein Complexes
To Enhance Infectious Bursal Disease Virus Polymerase Activity. J Virol 91, doi:10.1128/JVI.0058417 (2017).
Kuadkitkan, A., Wikan, N., Fongsaran, C. & Smith, D. R. Identification and characterization of
prohibitin as a receptor protein mediating DENV-2 entry into insect cells. Virology 406, 149-161,
doi:10.1016/j.virol.2010.07.015 (2010).
Kapoor, A., He, R., Venkatadri, R., Forman, M. & Arav-Boger, R. Wnt modulating agents inhibit
human cytomegalovirus replication. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 57, 2761-2767,
doi:10.1128/AAC.00029-13 (2013).
Choi, E. J., Kim, S., Jho, E. H., Song, K. J. & Kee, S. H. Axin expression enhances herpes simplex virus
type 1 replication by inhibiting virus-mediated cell death in L929 cells. J Gen Virol 94, 1636-1646,
doi:10.1099/vir.0.051540-0 (2013).
Zhu, L., Thunuguntla, P., Liu, Y., Hancock, M. & Jones, C. The beta-catenin signaling pathway
stimulates bovine herpesvirus 1 productive infection. Virology 500, 91-95,
doi:10.1016/j.virol.2016.10.014 (2017).
Zhu, L. & Jones, C. The canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway stimulates herpes simplex
virus 1 productive infection. Virus Res 256, 29-37, doi:10.1016/j.virusres.2018.07.020 (2018).
DuShane, J. K. & Maginnis, M. S. Human DNA Virus Exploitation of the MAPK-ERK Cascade. Int J
Mol Sci 20, doi:10.3390/ijms20143427 (2019).
Liu, Z. S. et al. G3BP1 promotes DNA binding and activation of cGAS. Nat Immunol 20, 18-28,
doi:10.1038/s41590-018-0262-4 (2019).
Yang, W. et al. G3BP1 inhibits RNA virus replication by positively regulating RIG-I-mediated cellular
antiviral response. Cell Death Dis 10, 946, doi:10.1038/s41419-019-2178-9 (2019).
Wong, J. J., Pung, Y. F., Sze, N. S. & Chin, K. C. HERC5 is an IFN-induced HECT-type E3 protein ligase
that mediates type I IFN-induced ISGylation of protein targets. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103, 1073510740, doi:10.1073/pnas.0600397103 (2006).
Tang, Y. et al. Herc5 attenuates influenza A virus by catalyzing ISGylation of viral NS1 protein. J
Immunol 184, 5777-5790, doi:10.4049/jimmunol.0903588 (2010).
Brehin, A. C. et al. The large form of human 2',5'-Oligoadenylate Synthetase (OAS3) exerts antiviral
effect against Chikungunya virus. Virology 384, 216-222, doi:10.1016/j.virol.2008.10.021 (2009).
Lin, R. J. et al. Distinct antiviral roles for human 2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetase family members
against dengue virus infection. J Immunol 183, 8035-8043, doi:10.4049/jimmunol.0902728 (2009).
Zhang, Y. et al. Activation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-3 in macrophages
restrains TLR4-NF-kappaB signaling and protects against endotoxin shock. Immunity 40, 501-514,
doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2014.01.013 (2014).
Ho, J., Moyes, D. L., Tavassoli, M. & Naglik, J. R. The Role of ErbB Receptors in Infection. Trends
Microbiol 25, 942-952, doi:10.1016/j.tim.2017.04.009 (2017).
Currier, M. G. et al. EGFR Interacts with the Fusion Protein of Respiratory Syncytial Virus Strain 220 and Mediates Infection and Mucin Expression. PLoS Pathog 12, e1005622,
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1005622 (2016).
Krzyzaniak, M. A., Zumstein, M. T., Gerez, J. A., Picotti, P. & Helenius, A. Host cell entry of
respiratory syncytial virus involves macropinocytosis followed by proteolytic activation of the F
protein. PLoS Pathog 9, e1003309, doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1003309 (2013).
Freeman, M. C., Peek, C. T., Becker, M. M., Smith, E. C. & Denison, M. R. Coronaviruses induce
entry-independent,
continuous
macropinocytosis.
mBio
5,
e01340-01314,
doi:10.1128/mBio.01340-14 (2014).
Tapinos, N., Ohnishi, M. & Rambukkana, A. ErbB2 receptor tyrosine kinase signaling mediates
early demyelination induced by leprosy bacilli. Nat Med 12, 961-966, doi:10.1038/nm1433 (2006).

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75

Plissonnier, M. L. et al. Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor-Dependent Mutual Amplification
between Netrin-1 and the Hepatitis C Virus. PLoS Biol 14, e1002421,
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1002421 (2016).
Stindt, S. et al. Hepatitis C Virus Activates a Neuregulin-Driven Circuit to Modify Surface Expression
of Growth Factor Receptors of the ErbB Family. PLoS One 11, e0148711,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0148711 (2016).
Cojohari, O., Peppenelli, M. A. & Chan, G. C. Human Cytomegalovirus Induces an Atypical
Activation of Akt To Stimulate the Survival of Short-Lived Monocytes. J Virol 90, 6443-6452,
doi:10.1128/JVI.00214-16 (2016).
Pei, R. et al. Hepatitis C virus infection induces the expression of amphiregulin, a factor related to
the activation of cellular survival pathways and required for efficient viral assembly. J Gen Virol
92, 2237-2248, doi:10.1099/vir.0.032581-0 (2011).
Ueki, I. F. et al. Respiratory virus-induced EGFR activation suppresses IRF1-dependent interferon
lambda and antiviral defense in airway epithelium. J Exp Med 210, 1929-1936,
doi:10.1084/jem.20121401 (2013).
Kalinowski, A. et al. EGFR activation suppresses respiratory virus-induced IRF1-dependent CXCL10
production. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 307, L186-196, doi:10.1152/ajplung.00368.2013
(2014).
Jia, X. et al. Structural basis of HIV-1 Vpu-mediated BST2 antagonism via hijacking of the clathrin
adaptor protein complex 1. Elife 3, e02362, doi:10.7554/eLife.02362 (2014).
Zhou, Y. et al. Metascape provides a biologist-oriented resource for the analysis of systems-level
datasets. Nat Commun 10, 1523, doi:10.1038/s41467-019-09234-6 (2019).
Benedetti, F. et al. Emerging of a SARS-CoV-2 viral strain with a deletion in nsp1. J Transl Med 18,
329, doi:10.1186/s12967-020-02507-5 (2020).
Kamitani, W., Huang, C., Narayanan, K., Lokugamage, K. G. & Makino, S. A two-pronged strategy
to suppress host protein synthesis by SARS coronavirus Nsp1 protein. Nat Struct Mol Biol 16, 11341140, doi:10.1038/nsmb.1680 (2009).
Thoms, M. et al. Structural basis for translational shutdown and immune evasion by the Nsp1
protein of SARS-CoV-2. Science 369, 1249-1255, doi:10.1126/science.abc8665 (2020).
Sahu, N. et al. Proline Starvation Induces Unresolved ER Stress and Hinders mTORC1-Dependent
Tumorigenesis. Cell Metab 24, 753-761, doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2016.08.008 (2016).
Tang, L. et al. Global Metabolic Profiling Identifies a Pivotal Role of Proline and Hydroxyproline
Metabolism in Supporting Hypoxic Response in Hepatocellular Carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 24,
474-485, doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-17-1707 (2018).
Choi, U. Y. et al. Oncogenic human herpesvirus hijacks proline metabolism for tumorigenesis. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 117, 8083-8093, doi:10.1073/pnas.1918607117 (2020).
Zhao, J., He, S., Minassian, A., Li, J. & Feng, P. Recent advances on viral manipulation of NF-kappaB
signaling pathway. Curr Opin Virol 15, 103-111, doi:10.1016/j.coviro.2015.08.013 (2015).
Stukalov, A. et al. Multi-level proteomics reveals host-perturbation strategies of SARS-CoV-2 and
SARS-CoV. bioRxiv, 2020.2006.2017.156455, doi:10.1101/2020.06.17.156455 (2020).
Chen, Z. et al. Global phosphoproteomic analysis reveals ARMC10 as an AMPK substrate that
regulates mitochondrial dynamics. Nat Commun 10, 104, doi:10.1038/s41467-018-08004-0
(2019).
Chen, Z. et al. Phosphoproteomics Analysis Reveals a Potential Role of CHK1 in Regulation of
Innate
Immunity
through
IRF3.
J
Proteome
Res
19,
2264-2277,
doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00829 (2020).

37

Figure 1
A

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
UTR review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
3’ UTR It is made
(which was not certified by5’ peer
SARS-CoV-2
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
29 viral genes
NSP1

ORF7a ORF8 ORF14

NSP11
NSP13
NSP5 NSP7 NSP9

NSP3

NSP4 NSP6 NSP10 NSP12

NSP2

NSP15

ORF3a M
S

NSP14 NSP16

NSPs (n=16)

N

Structure proteins (n=4) and
accessary factors (n=9)

B

Mass spectrometry
and bioinformatics

TAP

Bait

SFB

Viral bait

E

ORF3b ORF6 ORF7b ORF9b

NSP8

SFB/BioID2 tag

ORF10

Virus-host interactome

Bait

Proximity
labeling

Relative intensity

Bait
Prey

BioID2

m/z

C
SFB-TAP

29 virus genes + 2 controls (vector +GFP)

Experiments

93
546,822

2,479,999

Proteins

112,857

354,936

Unique preys

7,761

10,675

SAINTexpress BFDR ≤ 0.05

314

H

SFB-TAP

BioID2

2

12
(ORF9b, TOMM70)

10

(NSP1, PYCR1)
(NSP1, PYCR2)
(N, G3BP2)
(ORF3a, VSP39)
(N, G3BP1)
(ORF3a, CLCC1)
(NSP8, GLRX3)

6

log2(PSMs)

G

mean=0.98

HCIPs

8

enzyme

mean=0.95

4

Interactome analysis of
29 SARS-CoV-2 genes

peptidase transmembrane
ion channel
receptor
kinase
translation
regulator
transcription
regulator
other
transporter

●

6

I

F

●●

N
ORF7b
M
NSP6
ORF3a
NSP7
NSP3
NSP10
S
NSP1
NSP15
E
ORF6
ORF8
ORF9b
NSP5
ORF14
NSP8
ORF10
ORF3b
NSP11
NSP12
NSP13
NSP14
NSP16
NSP2
NSP4
NSP9
ORF7a

log2(HCIPs)

cytoplasm

0.4

●
●●
●
●●

●
●

8

0
nucleus

0.6

0.0

437

other extracellular space

0.8

0.2

130

Combined HCIPs

plasma
membrane

1.0

93

Peptides

E

1.2

Person’s r

Baits

D

BioID2

(ORF3a, VSP11)
(ORF7b, VTI1L)
(M, ATP2A3)
(NSP11, UBE4B)

4

ribosome biogenesis

2

vesicle organization

-10

organelle localization
vesicle-mediated transport

10

cellular response to stress
0

0
-2

40

10

-log10(q-value)

0

5

10

Non-specific binding proteins

Proteins

cellular protein localization

-5

20

HCIPs with MS signal in controls
HCIPs with no MS signal in controls
(Bait, Prey)

-4

log2(SAINTexpress-FoldChange)

15

Figure 2
ER membrane protein complex response to stimulus
transcriptional regulation DNA polymerase
bioRxiv preprint doi:alpha-primase
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961
; this version posted
January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
NSP2
NSP4
NSP9
complex
TDRD3
(which was notPOLA1
certified by PRIM1
peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to EMC3
display the EMC4
preprint in perpetuity.
It isGNPTAB
made
GNPTG
TET2
LRIT3 RDH12
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
MFX1
lysosome
PRIM2
POLA2
MVK
SMG6

MAP3K14 MOCS2

NSP1

RHEB

PYCR1
PYCR2

proline metabolism

TAP1

EIF3H
EIF3I

MACROH2A1

LMNA

EIF3E

EIF3K

MACROH2A2

MECP2

chromatin assembly
or disassembly

EIF3M

EIF3G

SSRP1

XPNPEP3

MDC1

NSP5

OAS3

DNA repair

LACTB
PPIH
ZZEF1

ACP6

chromatin remodeling

AHNAK

GLRX3

CNOT1

THOC6

CNOT2

TNKS1BP1

DVL1

BICD2

CNOT3

NSFL1C

DVL2

SMCHD1

CNOT6L

EIF4G3

DVL3

FBLN1

GSTCD

MIB2

PLEKHH2

RBSN

OBI1

TAS2R39

SNAPC1

UBE4B OR2AE1

DCD

ANKIB1

TMEM39A

NACAD

PPFIBP2

ARFGEF3

CLCC1

KIAA1549

NBEA

MBNL1
RASEF

LRP2

ANO5

USP33

AMAF

CREG1

MICOS13

ATP2A3

ASAP3

PEX5

ATF6

MTHFR

DENND4A

C2CD5

CGRRF1

FAM219A

CYP2J2

EPB41L1

TMEM94

ARHGAP32

KCNG1

GUCY1B1

SNX12

STX6

KCNT2

STX10

AHNAK2

BIN1

FCHSD2

AP4E1

transcriptional regulation immune response

THAP4

SRSF10

VEZF1

YY1AP1

YBX3

ZBTB11

ZNF100

ZKSCAN8

ZNF22

ZNF668

ZNF48

ZNF746

ZNF574

HERC5

G3BP1

TRIM3

RPS3A
RPS4X

HNRNPU

SRSF3

MEX3D

YBX1

RBMXL1

IGF2BP1 complex

AKT3

DHX33
DUSP11

RPL19

GSK3B

YTHDC2

RPS8

RPL23A U2AF1L4
DDX50
RPL26

ZC3H7B

RPS11

RPL26L1

RPS13

RPL31

RPS15

RPL39

translation and
viral transcription

mitochondrial
calcium ion transport
SIGMAR1

RNF121

C6orf47 ABHD14A

APR1

MELK
OBSL1

PRPS1L1

ORF3b

NT5DC1

DES

HOPS complex

SPCS1

SEC11A

SPCS2

A2M
SFN

SPCS3

VPS11

NEDD1

VPS16

TRAPPC9

VPS18

TRAPPC10

VPS39

PTPRJ
SYT1

PTPN14

DEPDC7

EZR

intracellular transport

ORF7a

TUBG1

PPP1R16B

S

MANBA
OLFML2A

SLC5A2 ALDH3B1

NPTX1
ORF8

COL18A1

VPS13B

PABPC3

ZC3H4

ORF6

E

PICALM

TRIP11

SEC24A

SEC23A

SEC31A

LRRC8E

LRRC8A
LRRC8C

vesicle target

SET

ACTG1

ORF14

SNARE interactions in vesicular transport vesicle-mediated transport
VPS45

STX10

RUFY1

RUFY2

ALG5

ALG14

HIP1R

STX6

VAMP2

STX12

BMS1

RCL1

VAMP3

STX16

BOP1

SRFBP1

VAMP4

CDH2

CAVIN1

USP36

VAMP8

LMAN2

LPAR1

MCAM

DDX10

WDR12

NAPG

VTI1A

DDR1

MOB1B

DDX21

KRI1

NAPA

ANO6

ABCC4

KHDC1

DDX28

TUT7

SNAP29

SCAP

INTS7
KLHDC2

ATP13A1

PPAN
FBL

NOP14
NOP56

SDAD1

IGHMBP2

KAT7

SHPRH

PLCH1

BMPR1A

ROGDI ERBB4
PTPRG

CTNNA1

ORF7b

ERBB receptor signaling
ATP7A IL18R1

TMC7

FXYD6

LRFN1

SEMA4B

MAP7

FAM98A

FMNL3

RILPL2

SLC37A11
ORF9b

FARP1

FRMD5

integral component of membrane
ORF10

Bait
Prey identified by SFB-TAP

SERPINB5 SEC63 BCL9

HSPA8

TOMM70

HSPA1L

HSPA1A

protein targeting

FAM171A2
PTTG1IP

MCRS1

MAP7D1

TMEM192

SMIM1
ADGRE5 DAGLB
exocytic process GPAT3

transport of small molecules

RNF187

CD302
BSCL2

NCEH1

LRRC8E

SEMA4C

EGFR

RTN2

STEAP3

DNA repair
C11orf98

ERBB2

ARFIP2

ARFIP1

METTL17

UTP6

TTC28

TRIM71

NOC4L

KLHL36

FBF1

anion transport
SLC4A2

NSA2

SCAPER

cell cycle

signal peptide processing

SORD ACSS1 PITRM1

ABT1

DGKZ
PINX1

ANXA6
ARPC1B

NSP16

NSP14

ORF3a

ribosome biogenesis

RNA processing
MCM10

ANXA
ANXA5

USP25
NSP15

KLHL36

TPD52L2

KRR1

RPL7L1 CCDC137
ZNF346
RPL10

ROGDI

KLHDC2

FAM160B1

SLC6A15

gamma-tubulin complex

SH3D19

DDX37

RPS24

RPS17

DDHD2

TUBG2
MZT2A

IGF2R

GTPBP4

N

RPS6
RPS9

CAV1

RPS6KA6

INTS7

TUBGCP5

KIF13A

G3BP2

TTLL4

ZNF768
RPS2

NDUFAF1

TUBGCP6 VPS41

Golgi-associated vesicle biogenesis

PTOV1

MRS2

TUBGCP3

VPS13C

AP1G1

CAV1 AP1M1
FCHO2 AP1S1

PITX2

PHB2

B4GALT3

DHFR

UTP6

TTC28

PGAP6

MAN2C1

TPD52L1

DLG1 SH3GL3
PACSIN2

PRDM10

PHB

ATP13A3

TUBGCP2

TAX1BP1

M

endocytosis

NFX1

ATP6AP1

DNA or RNA process

PEBP1

ATF6B

TUBGCP4

BTN2A2

DEPDC1

SARM1

MYG1

NCAPD2

inorganic cation integral component of membrane
transmembrane transport

TUBA3E HSPD1 TUBA1B

ATF6

ABCD4

CHD1

ATP5PO

signal transduction
NSP10

CAMTA1

SPG7

NSP6

AKAP12

positive regulation of protein binding

PDZD8

TTC30A

ATP5PF

CCDC22

RPS6KC1

SLC12A4

ATP5PD

DHX32

ENDOD1
FAM114A2

SKP1

NSP13

MED29

FLT4

VDAC2

NSP8

NSP12

NSP11

CNKSR3

TUBA3E

SREBF1

ATP5PB

SLC39A10

DDX12P

THOC1

ERK cascade

cellular transport

VDAC1

negative regulation of TCF-dependent signaling

MLF2
RGS19

SUPT16H

CIAPIN1

DIABLO
SUOX

CHAF1A

BAZ1B

DHX29

HECTD3

TTC19

BAZ1A
DEK

HYOU1

NSP7

ZDHHC13

ATP5F1D

SMARCA4

CCR4-NOT complex

BRCA1

ATP5F1B

CBX5

VRK1

NSP3

PUM3

FKBP10

USP11

EMC7

MIB1

PSIP1

translation initiation factor
PCMT1

PASK

regulation of transcription

EIF3B
EIF3C
EIF3F

SERPINB4

mitochondrial transport

Prey identified by BioID2
Prey identified by both
Interaction
Function group

Figure 3
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Pulldown

Vector
GFP
ORF3a
ORF9b

Vector
GFP
ORF3a
ORF9b

Input

Pulldown
Vector
GFP
S
ORF9b

Input

Vector
GFP
S
ORF9b

C

A

150

VPS11

100
75

25

SPCS2

20

75

CLCC1

150
100
75
50

50

150
100
75
50

Flag

37

Flag

25

37

20

25

15

20
15

B
CLCC1

Flag (ORF3a)

CLCC1

Flag (vector)

DAPI

DAPI

Merged

Merged

Figure 4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
Amitriptyline;
(which was not certified by peer
review)Remoxipride;
is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv aCladribine;
license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
Haloperidol; Dextromethorphan;
Clofarabine;
RPL19
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International
license.
Pentazocine; Cocaine; Hydrocodone;
Dimethyltryptamine; Prasterone;
Phencyclidine; Noscapine;
Captodiame; Pentoxyverine

SIGMAR1

POLA2 Dacarbazine

Pyrimethamine; Methotrexate;
Pemetrexed; Gentamicin;
Proguanil; Trimetrexate;
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate;
Piritrexim; Biopterin;

DHFR

APOB

POLA1 Fludarabine;
Nelarabine

NSP1

PRIM1

Mipomersen

PRIM2

Isoflurane;
ATP5F1D Desflurane

RDH12

PHB2

PHB

N

RPS8

RPS9
Bumetanide;
SLC12A4 Potassium chloride

M
Rocaglamide;
Didesmethylrocaglamide;
Capsaicin

Tamoxifen
Trastuzumab;
Lapatinib;
Afatinib;
Fostamatinib;
Brigatinib;
Zanubrutinib;
Lapatinib;
Varlitinib;
Pertuzumab

BMPR1A Dibotermin alfa

CDH2

N-ac-CHAVC-NH2

DDR1

Imatinib;
Fostamatinib;
nilotinib

VAMP2

Botulinum Toxin Type B

RPS13

Mecasermin;
alpha-D-mannose 6-phosphate;
IGF2R
Cerliponase alfa;
Mecasermin rinfabate

RPS17

TPD52L2 Phenethyl Isothiocyanate

Fostamatinib

Matuzumab; Vandetanib;
Rindopepimut; Canertinib;
Pelitinib; Varlitinib; AV-412;
Afatinib; Osimertinib;
Necitumumab; Foreskin keratinocyte (neonatal);
Depatuxizumab mafodotin; Icotinib;
Neratinib; Dacomitinib; Fostamatinib;
Zalutumumab; Brigatinib; Olmutinib; Zanubrutinib

ERBB4

Artenimol

NADH;
Proline

PYCR2

SREBF1

Aluminium monostearate;
Cannabidiol;
Medical Cannabis;
VDAC1 Nabiximols;
Sorafenib; Sunitinib;
PRLX 93936
Vatalanib; Denibulin;
ABT-869; IMC-1C11;
Pazopanib; Axitinib;
Cetuximab; Lidocaine;
Regorafenib; Lenvatinib;
Gefitinib; Erlotinib;
Nintedanib; Fostamatinib;
Lapatinib; Panitumumab;
Selpercatinib
Alvocidib; IGN311;

ERBB2

RPS6

PYCR1

VDAC2

EGFR

RPL10

Vitamin A

RPS6KA6

ORF7b

RPL26L1
Alemtuzumab;
Cyclophosphamide;
Fludarabine phosphate

RPS2

Quercetin; Piceatannol;
1-ACETYL-2-CARBOXYPIPERIDINE;
ATP5F1B AUROVERTIN B;
Phenethyl Isothiocyanate
NSP6

RPL23A

MVK Farnesyl thiopyrophosphate

Artenimol

ATP5PO

(S)-3-phenyllactic acid;
Anisomycin

NSP8

GUCY1B1 Nitroprusside

SKP1

PPIH

SLC5A2

NSP15

Proline
DIABLO
Phenethyl Isothiocyanate

S

A2M Becaplermin;
Cisplatin;
Bacitracin;
Ocriplasmin;
Zinc acetate;
Zinc chloride;
Zinc sulfate

Bait

MELK Fostamatinib

GSK3B
Lithium cation; SB-409513; AR-AO-14418;
Staurosporine; Indirubin-3'-monoxime;
6-bromoindirubin-3'-oxime; Alsterpaullone;
Phosphoaminophosphonic Acid-Adenylate Ester;
Fostamatinib; Tideglusib; Lithium citrate;
Lithium succinate; Lithium carbonate

FLT4

DCD

NSP12

ORF10

Zinc; Zinc acetate;
Zinc chloride; Zinc sulfate
NSP5

Dapagliflozin; Canagliflozin;
Empagliflozin; Ertugliflozin
NSP10

Doconexent; Omega-3 fatty acids;
Omega-3-acid ethyl esters; Fish oil

Cyanocobalamin;
MTHFR Tetrahydrofolic acid

Indoleacetic acid
ORF7a

CHD1 Epirubicin

SERPINB5

S,S-(2-Hydroxyethyl)Thiocysteine

PCMT1

ORF3b

SORD

Cp-166572;
Pyrimidine

ORF3a

LRP2

Urokinase;
Insulin pork;
Gentamicin

S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine

ANXA5
E
Fluocinolone acetonide;
L-Alpha-Glycerophosphorylserine;
L-thioproline;
sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine;
ORF9b
1,4-Dideoxy-O2-Sulfo-Glucuronic Acid;
N,O6-Disulfo-Glucosamine;
1,4-Dideoxy-5-Dehydro-O2-Sulfo-Glucuronic Acid
ORF8

Protein-protein Interaction

COL18A1

Prey (drug target)

AKT3 triciribine

HSPA8
Dasatinib;
Artenimol

Collagenase clostridium histolyticum

Function group with the same drug(s)

Figure 5

B 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
A bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January

PC2 (22.35%)

Seven human coronavirus strains

(which was not certified by peer review)
180 is
aathe author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.8
SARS-CoV-2
HCoV-HKU1
180 aa
HCoV-229E
SARS-CoV-1
HCoV-OC43
4
193 aa
MERS-CoV
0
SFB-TAP
222 aa
Interactome
HCoV-HKU1
MERS-CoV
analysis
HCoV-NL63
BioID2
246 aa
-4
HCoV-OC43

NSP1

(a) HCIPs from BioID2

(a)

(b)

SARS-CoV-2

SARS-CoV-1
DNA polymerase
alpha-primase complex

MERS-CoV

HCoV-HKU1

HCoV-HKU1

(c)

HCoV-NL63

HCoV-NL63

HCoV-229E

HCoV-229E
HCoV-OC43

HCoV-OC43
0

(c)

translation initiation

>100

HCoV-229E

spectral count

HCoV-OC43
transcription and translation
DNA topological change
cell cycle

HCIPs from SFB-TAP

D

(3)

(2)

SARS-CoV-2

(5)

SARS-CoV-1 (1)

0

HCoV-OC43

>200
spectral count

HCoV-HKU1

E

(4)

HCoV-NL63

SARS-CoV-2

HCoV-HKU1

SARS-CoV-1

HCoV-NL63

MERS-CoV

HCoV-229E

HCoV-HKU1

MERS-CoV

HCoV-NL63

(2)

POLA2
POLA1
PRIM2
PRIM1

translation initiation
DNA repair
cell cycle
DNA polymerase
alpha-primase complex

HCoV-229E
HCoV-OC43
endoribonuclease
(4)

SARS-CoV-2

HCoV-229E

SARS-CoV-1

DNA repair factor
E3 ubiquitin ligase

DNA polymerase
alpha-primase complex

SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-1
HCoV-OC43
HCoV-HKU1
HCoV-NL63
HCoV-229E
MERS-CoV
endoribonuclease
proline biosynthesis

Pulldown with S-protein agarose

HCoV-OC43

(5)

SFB-tag
PYCR1

37

PYCR2

37

25

25
50

Flag

37
25
20

PYCR1

37

PYCR2

37

Input

RIPK1
AGO3

(3)

GTF2H3
GTF2H1
ERCC5
GTF2H4
HECTD1
ERCC3

EIF4G2
STIP1
UBR5
CKAP5
NPHP3

MERS-CoV

DICER1
USP9X
PYCR2
PYCR1

HCoV-229E

(1)

20

SARS-CoV-2

SARS-CoV-1

MERS-CoV

Bait: NSP1

(b)

SARS-CoV-2

SARS-CoV-1

Bait: NSP1

-10
0
10
PC1 (31.94%)
POLA1
POLA2

111 aa

SARS-CoV-1

Vector
GFP
SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-1
MERSE-CoV
HCoV-HKU1
HCoV-OC43
HCoV-NL63
HCoV-229E

C

-8
-20

TOP2A
TOP2B
SUPT16H
PSIP1
MACROH2A1
SMARCA5
SMARCA1
VRK1
PUM3
MACROH2A2
BAZ1B

HCoV-229E

SARS-CoV-2

110 aa

EIF3B
EIF3E
EIF3F
EIF3I
EIF3M
EIF3H
EIF3G
EIF3K

HCoV-NL63

25

25
50

Flag

37
25
20

Figure 6

C

HCoV-OC43
HCoV-HKU1

448 aa

Interactome
analysis

SFB-TAP

441 aa

PC2 (23.89 %)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a B
license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
419 aa available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
SARS-CoV-2
20
422 aa
SARS-CoV-1
HCoV-NL63
HCoV-HKU1
10
413 aa
MERS-CoV
HCoV-229E
Seven human coronavirus strains

A

377 aa

HCoV-NL63

MERS-CoV

HCoV-OC43

-10

SARS-CoV-1

-20
-20

389 aa

HCoV-229E

0

SARS-CoV-2

-10

0

10

20

PC1 (30.81 %)

N protein

Bait: N protien

SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-1
HCoV-229E
HCoV-NL63
HCoV-HKU1
MERS-CoV
HCoV-OC43

(1)

(2)

(2)

(3)

(3)

RPS13
GTPBP4
RPS24
RPL10
RPS15
RPS15A
RPL19
RPL26
RPL26L1
SYNCRIP
HNRNPR
RPS6
RPS9
RPL17
RPL23A
RPS3A
RTCB
YBX3
YBX1
RPS2
DHX9
HNRNPU
DDX21
RPS4X

spectral count

(1)

MKI67
HNRNPC
H1-4
HNRNPAB
SSB
FAM120A

>300

DDX1
G3BP1
G3BP2
HNRNPA2B1
PABPC4
LARP1
PABPC1
LARP1B

0

SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-1
MERS-CoV
HCoV-OC43
HCoV-HKU1
HCoV-NL63
HCoV-229E
tRNA processing
immune response
Spliceosome
mRNA stability
regulation of translation
ribosome

D
ribonucleoprotein complex
UTP3

WDR3

RRP36

BOP1

RRP1B

TBL3 MPHOSPH10 WDR46

UTP11

UTP14A

NOC4L

NOP14

RCL1

NOL6

FBL

NOP56

KRI1

BMS1

IMP4

RPF1

KRR1

IMP3

UTP18

preribosome and ribosome biogenesis

PPP1CA

DYNLL2
PPP1CC

CENPC

RPS6
RPS2
RPS9

RPS10

RPL31

RPL23A

PABPC1

RPL17

RPS13

RPL3

RPS4X

RPL35

RPS8

RPS15A

RPL13A

DHX9

RPS17

RPL28

RPS11

RPL7L1

SYNCRIP

RPS15

RPL18

RPS3A

RPL26

RPL10

RPL26L1

RPL19

RPS24

ribosome, translation initiation, elongation,
termination, and viral mRNA translation

FAM98A
RTCB

DDX1

FAM98B
INCENP KIF18A

RHO GTPases Activate Formins

HNRNPA0

RTRAF

tRNA-splicing ligase complex

YBX1

DHX8

RBMX

SRRM1

SNIP1

U2AF2

AQR

PLRG1

HNRNPR

HNRNPA2B1 SRSF1
SRSF3

RBMX2

HNRNPC HNRNPU
U2AF1L4

CHTOP

spliceosome, mRNA splicing

IQCE

QKI

GSK3B

EFCAB7

MARK3

GSK3A

regulation of
protein localization

mRNA stability
regulation

beta-catenin
destruction

Figure 7
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

C

ISRE luc (fold change)

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

500

1.5
1.0
0.5

FP V-2 V-1 CoV KU1 C43 L63 29E
G
o
o
C -C S-H -O V-N V-2
S ER
SoV CoV Co Co
R
R
M HC H
H
H
SA SA

N protein

N protein

D

75

G3BP2

75

50

50

Input

Pulldown with S-protein agarose

SFB-tag

G3BP1

Flag

37

300

G3BP2

200
100

R

SA

1
-1
43
63
oV
9E
C
C
KU NL
oV -22
S-O
-H
V
V
V
V
R
o
o
o
o
E
C
C
C
C
M
H
H
H
H

C
S-

Human coronavirus

75

G3BP2

75

50

50
75

Flag

-2
oV

C
S-

R

G3BP1

75
50

G3BP1

SA

N protein

N protein

SFB-tag

400

0

0.0

FP V-2 V-1 CoV KU1 C43 L63 29E
G
o
o
C -C S-H -O V-N V-2
S ER
So
oV oV o
R
R
C HC HC HC
M
A
A
H
S
S

Vector
GFP
SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-1
MERS-CoV
HCoV-HKU1
HCoV-OC43
HCoV-NL63
HCoV-229E

0.0

2.0

Vector
GFP
SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-1
MERS-CoV
HCoV-HKU1
HCoV-OC43
HCoV-NL63
HCoV-229E

IFN-beta (fold change)

1.2

Averaged PSMs

B

A

50
37

25

25

20

20

BioID2-tag

Streptavidin
N
O

N
O
RF
O 9b
RF
O 14
RF
10

C
RF
O 9b
RF
O 14
RF
10

HA
Em
p
Ve ty
ct
G or
F
NSP
P
NS 1
P
NS 2
P
NS 3
P
NS 4
P
NS 5
P6
NS
P
NS 7
P
NS 8
NSP9
P
NS 10
P1
1
NS
P
NS 12
P1
NS 3
P
NS 14
P
NS 15
P
S 16
O
RF
O 3a
RF
E 3b
M
O
R
O F6
R
O F7a
RF
O 7b
RF
8

BioID2-tag

p
Ve ty
ct
G or
F
NSP
P
NS 1
P
NS 2
P
NS 3
P
NS 4
P5
NS
P
NS 6
P
NS 7
P
NS 8
NSP9
P
NS 10
P1
1
NS
P1
NS 2
P
NS 13
P
NS 14
P
NS 15
P
S 16
O
RF
O 3a
RF
E 3b
M
O
R
O F6
RF
O 7a
RF
O 7b
RF
8

Ve
ct
G or
FP
NS
P
NS 1
P2
NS
P
NS 3
P4
NS
P
NS 5
P6
NS
P
NS 7
P8
NS
NSP9
P
NS 10
P1
1
NS
P
NS 12
P
NS 13
P
NS 14
P
NS 15
S P16
O
R
O F3a
RF
E 3b
M
O
R
O F6
RF
O 7a
R
O F7b
RF
8
N
O
RF
O 9b
RF
O 14
RF
10

SFB-tag

Em

Figure S1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
A

Flag

B

Figure S2
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint

A (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made

Infection with reporter plasmids
and viral proteins plasmids
(IFN-beta-luc)
Sendai Virus (SeV infection 12h)

1.0

0.5

0.0

G
F
NS P
NSP1
NSP2
NSP3
NSP4
NSP5
NSP6
NSP7
NSP8
NS P9
NSP10
NS P11
NSP12
NSP13
NSP14
NSP15
P1
6
O S
RF
O 3a
RF
3b

E
O M
R
O F6
R
O F7a
RF
O 7b
RF
8
O N
RF
9
O b
R
O F14
RF
10

Reporter Assay

1.5
available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

IFN-beta (fold change)

HEK293T in 24-well plates

B

0.5

0.0

E
O M
R
O F6
RF
O 7a
RF
O 7b
RF
8
O N
RF
O 9b
R
O F14
RF
10

Reporter Assay

1.0

G
F
NS P
NSP1
NSP2
NSP3
NSP4
NSP5
NSP6
NSP7
NSP8
NS P9
NSP10
NS P11
NSP12
NSP13
NSP14
NSP15
P1
6
O S
RF
O 3a
RF
3b

Infection with reporter plasmids
and viral proteins plasmids
(5 X ISRE-luc + IRF3)

1.5

ISRE luc (fold change)

HEK293T in 24-well plates

Figure S3

B

0

100%
Identity

Protein sequence identity

1.0
**

0.8
0.6

***

***
***

***

***

0.4
0.2
0.0

***

-1 oV U1 43 63 9E
-2
G
oV oV C HK OC -NL -22
C -C SV oV
R
S
S
oV oV o
R ME
R
C HC HC HC
H
SA SA
FP

1.0

*

0.8
0.6
0.4

-1 oV U1 43 63 9E
-2
oV oV -C HK OC -NL -22
C S
V oV
R
S
oV oV o
R ME
R
C HC HC HC
H
SA SA
C
S-

NSP1

F
NSP1

NSP1

SA
R
SA S-C
RS oV
M -C -2
ER o
V
HC S- -1
oV CoV
HC -H
o K
HC V-N U1
oV L6
HC -O 3
oV C4
-2 3
29
E

SA
R
SA S-C
RS oV
M -C -2
ER o
V
HC S- -1
oV CoV
HC -H
o K
HC V-N U1
o L6
HC V-O 3
oV C4
-2 3
29
E

***
***

FP

G

E
NSP1

BioID2-tag

Flag

*

***

0.2
0.0

*

*

NSP1

D

SFB-tag

1.2

BioID2-tag

SA
R
SA S-C
RS oV
M -C -2
ER o
V
HC S- -1
oV CoV
HC -H
o K
HC V-N U1
o L6
HC V-O 3
oV C4
-2 3
29
E

SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-1
MERS-CoV
HCoV-HKU1
HCoV-OC43
HCoV-NL63
HCoV-229E

1.2

ISRE luc (fold change)

NSP1

C

IFN-beta (fold change)

SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-1
MERS-CoV
HCoV-HKU1
HCoV-OC43
HCoV-NL63
HCoV-229E

A

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Streptavidin

HA

G

DNMBP SNX33

GTF2H1 PUM3
GTF2H3

MACROH2A1
AK4

PSIP1
CFAP298

USP9X

FN3KRP
KLHL29 ERCC6L SNX9
GAREM1
HACE1
ADPRMLRP1 USP5
NCAPH
OTUD5 PARP4
CARD8
FAM135A
PAN2 FH
TRMT10A
SNX18
HECW2

CUL7
TOP2A
CDR2L
RBM12BZBED1
LRP2
SMARCA5
HCoV-NL63
STRIP2
MACROH2A2
CCNHERCC3
YAP1
CBX5
APBA2 CDR2
CAB39
HCoV-229E SSRP1 TOP2B
ERCC5
DICER1
EEF2K
USP48
BAZ1B
FBXW8
VRK1
DIS3L2
SMARCA1
WDHD1
HCoV-OC43
GTF2H4
SUPT16H
CHD1
RPS6KA1
HECTD1

SRA1

SIPA1L2
RIPK1

CTTN

UBR5

AGO3

CCDC50

HCoV-HKU1

SMG6

GATB

UBR4

ORC2 NFX1

NUDT5 PYCR2

EIF3K

PPP2R5C

SARS-CoV-1

HAUS6

BEND3

RBM33 CENPJ

EIF3I

KDM5C

STIP1

TCF7L1 EIF4G2 RUSC2

RAD23BPPIL1

MERS-CoV

IFFO1

PDE4D

NPHP3
TDRD3

DENND4C

VWA8
NECAP2
TAF6 CNN3

RAD23A MYBL2

ARID5B

CMTR2 BCLAF1
TUBA3D
CKAP5

POLA2
PRIM1
POLA1

SARS-CoV-2

PRIM2

EIF3B
MVK

PYCR1 EIF3M
EIF3E

EIF3F
EIF3H
EIF3G

SARS-CoV-2 NSP1 interactions
SARS-CoV-1 NSP1 interactions
MERS NSP1 interactions
NL63 NSP1 interactions
OC43 NSP1 interactions
229E NSP1 interactions
HKU1 NSP1 interactions
Virus NSP1
Prey

Figure S4

SARS-CoV-1
MERS-CoV

HCoV-229E

HCoV-NL63

HCoV-OC43

HCoV-HKU1

0

SFB-tag

Vector
GFP
SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-1
MERS-CoV
HCoV-HKU1
HCoV-OC43
HCoV-NL63
HCoV-229E

SARS-CoV-2

MERS-CoV

N protein

SARS-CoV-1

SARS-CoV-2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
A
B
N protein

100%
Identity

Flag

HCoV-OC43
HCoV-HKU1
HCoV-NL63
HCoV-229E
Protein sequence identity

C
SARS-CoV-2 N protein interactions

NL63 N protein interactions

HKU1 N protein interactions

SARS-CoV-1 N protein interactions

OC43 N protein interactions

Virus N protein

MERS N protein interactions

229E N protein interactions

Prey

RBM6

RBM15B
RSBN1

UTP18

UTP11 APOBEC3B

ZNF512B

CLK1

TTC23
ZNF48 HNRNPR
HNRNPUL2
RBMX2
SURF6 CCDC86
CHTOP SPOUT1
USP42
IMP4
DDX54
NOL6
SCAF1
NOP16
BUD23
DDX10
ZCCHC9
FARP1
PHRF1
RPL28
SPATS2L
WRN INCENP
KHDRBS1
DHX57 TBL3 RPL35 RECQL4
DYNLL2
RTRAF DDX31
ZFP62 SRSF1 PARN
UTP3
DDX1
ZNF316
H1-10
EFCAB7
ZCCHC17
SHPRH
MPHOSPH10 LLGL2 HMMR
ZNF724
PTRH1 KIF18A
CHD2
RBM45
FAM98B
TUT7
IQCE
SNIP1
IBTK
ZNF768
G3BP2
RTCB
RPF1CENPC
SARS-CoV-1
G3BP1
SRSF12 ARHGAP19
BOP1
MERS-CoV
DHX8
PINX1
RPS15A RPS6
SLTM
CHD3
GLYR1
ZC2HC1A
CLK4
AQR MARK1
NUSAP1
FAM98A
NOC4L
HCoV-OC43
HCoV-HKU1
RPL7L1
GSK3B
IGHMBP2
RBMXL1 BMS1
VEZF1
RPL17
ZNF100
NSUN5
CHD1
ZNF346
HP1BP3
USP36
CAVIN1 KAT7
KHDRBS3
SYNCRIP
RPS13
DDX21
DHX34
RRS1
MARK3
RPL3
HNRNPU
RCL1
RPS3A
EXOSC10
MRM3
CLK3
L1RE1
RPL23A
RPS15 RPL19
METTL17 RRP36
YBX3
WDR46
DDX50
RPL26L1
UTP14A
HERC5
U2AF1L4
NOP14
SRSF3
CKAP2L
ZKSCAN8
PLRG1
NKAP HABP4
IMP3
RPS17
FAM120A
CACTIN
WDR3 ZNF668SCAPER
RPL13A
CUSTOS MAP7
CMSS1
GSK3A
RBM47
PUM3
RPS9
KRI1
RBM19
KRR1
HNRNPC
SLIT2
PRC1
C11orf98
H1-6
PLCH1 HASPIN
ZC3H7B
SRFBP1
PECR
ZNF326
FBL
SARS-CoV-2 DHX36
MKI67
MELK
HCoV-NL63
HCoV-229E
REXO4
CAMTA1
RPL26
RBMX
TOP2B
DEPDC1
DHX9
MCRS1
GTPBP4
H1-0 HNRNPA0
PTBP3
KLHDC4
SRRM1
APOBEC3D
CIRBP
CCDC137
RPS24
ZCCHC3
MAP7D1
RALY
HOXA5
DDX28
RPS2 RPL31
PAK1IP1
SSB
C18orf21
GPR50
FMNL3
PRPF4B
QKI
PITX2 NOP56
AATF
NFX1
MEX3D
RPS11
LARP1
YBX1
PPP1CA
RRP1B
RPL10
ACAD11
ZNF385A LARP1B
HNRNPAB
DGKZ
THAP4
PRDM10
HNRNPA2B1
ABT1 RPS8
RPF2DECR1TMPRSS3
YTHDC2
RPS10
U2AF2
TOP2A
PPP1CC
ZBTB11
RPS4X
ZNF746
DHX33
PABPC1 H1-2
MAGEB2 RPL18
PABPC4 H1-4

Figure S5
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.424961; this version posted January 2, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
A
B
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND
4.0 International license.

SFB (314)

307

Bait
NSP1
ORF3a
ORF3a
ORF3a
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF9b

BioID2 (130)

7

375

123

Bait
N
N
NSP6
NSP6
NSP6
ORF8
ORF9b

Prey
POLA1
VPS39
CLCC1
VPS11
DDR1
TMEM192
TOMM70
Bait
M
M
N
NSP6
NSP6
NSP6
NSP6
NSP6
NSP6
NSP6
NSP6
NSP6
NSP6
NSP6
NSP6

This study (437)

Prey
ATP2A3
CAV1
CAVIN1
APOB
ATP5F1B
ATP5F1D
ATP5PB
ATP5PD
CAV1
EMC3
EMC4
ENDOD1
SARM1
SLC6A15
WFS1

Bait
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b

Prey
G3BP1
G3BP2
ATP13A3
ATP6AP1
SIGMAR1
NPTX1
TOMM70

Prey
ALG14
ALG5
ANO6
ARFIP1
BMPR1A
BSCL2
CTNNA1
DAGLB
KLHDC2
LMAN2
LPAR1
LRFN1
NAPG
NCEH1
SCAP

Bait
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b
ORF7b

Krogan (389)
352

12
43

7

18

1100

Pichlmair (1168)

Prey
SEMA4B
SEMA4C
SMIM1
STEAP3
STX10
STX12
STX16
STX6
TMEM192
VAMP3
VAMP4
VPS45
VTI1A

Bait
M
M
M
M
M
NSP2
NSP8
NSP9
NSP9
ORF7a
ORF8
ORF8
ORF8
ORF8
ORF8
ORF8
S
S

Bait
N
N
NSP1
NSP1
NSP1
NSP1
NSP9
ORF3a
ORF3a
ORF3a
NSP16
NSP16

Prey
PITRM1
COQ8B
PMPCB
INTS4
RTN4
RAP1GDS1
ATE1
GTF2F2
NEK9
MDN1
GGH
UGGT2
OS9
ERLEC1
SDF2
ADAM9
GOLGA7
ZDHHC5

Prey
FAM98A
DDX21
POLA1
PRIM1
PRIM2
POLA2
MIB1
VPS39
CLCC1
VPS11
CCDC22
USP25

