bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.31.230888; this version posted September 25, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Submitted to Biointerphases

Computer Simulations of the interaction between SARS-CoV-2 spike
glycoprotein and different surfaces
David C. Malaspina1 and Jordi Faraudo1, a)
Institut de Ciència de Materials de Barcelona (ICMAB-CSIC), Campus de la UAB, 08193 Bellaterra, Barcelona,
Spain
(Dated: 25 September 2020)

A prominent feature of coronaviruses is the presence of a large glycoprotein spike protruding from a lipidic membrane.
This glycoprotein spike determines the interaction of coronaviruses with the environment and the host. In this paper, we
perform all atomic Molecular Dynamics simulations of the interaction between the SARS-CoV-2 trimeric glycoprotein
spike and surfaces of materials. We considered a material with high hydrogen bonding capacity (cellulose) and a
material capable of strong hydrophobic interactions (graphite). Initially, the spike adsorbs to both surfaces through
essentially the same residues belonging to the receptor binding subunit of its three monomers. Adsorption onto cellulose
stabilizes in this configuration, with the help of a large number of hydrogen bonds developed between cellulose and
the three receptor binding domains (RBD) of the glycoprotein spike. In the case of adsorption onto graphite, the initial
adsorption configuration is not stable and the surface induces a substantial deformation of the glycoprotein spike with
a large number of adsorbed residues not pertaining to the binding subunits of the spike monomers.
The following article has been submitted to the journal
Biointerphases. After it is published, it will be found at
https://avs.scitation.org/journal/bip

I.

INTRODUCTION

The novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 (Figure 1a) emerged
in December 2019 as a human pathogen5 that causes the
COVID-19 disease outbreak that rapidly spread worldwide6 .
This virus belongs to the family of Coronaviridae and it is
the third documented spillover of an animal coronavirus to
humans in only two decades that has resulted in a major
epidemic5 .
Coronaviruses are enveloped, single-stranded RNA viruses,
with the typical structure shown in Figure 1b. The virus envelope contains lipids and several proteins. These are the socalled envelope (E) and membrane (M) proteins, which play
essential roles during virion assembly7 and the spike glycoprotein (S) which is responsible for the interaction of a coronavirus particle with a host cell receptor (the ACE2 human
receptor, in the case of SARS-CoV-28 ). The large protruding
glycoprotein spikes on the envelope of coronaviruses give a
characteristic appearance to this virus family, and give them
their name (from "corona", which is Latin for “crown”).
In an unprecedented effort, the scientific community has
been able to rapidly identify not only the nature of the
pathogen causing the COVID-19 disease but also most details
of its molecular structure with atomistic resolution. For example the identification and full characterization of the virus9
was available in February 2020 and the atomistic structure of
the spike glycoprotein, shown in Figures 1c,d, was published3
as early as in March 2020. At the time of writing, the Protein Data Bank10 hosts about ∼ 300 structures related to the
SARS-CoV-2 virus.

a) Electronic

mail: jfaraudo@icmab.es

This wealth of experimental data has been also augmented with structures obtained from modelling techniques
and molecular dynamics (MD) trajectories. For example, in
recent works11,12 the authors employ modelling software to
include in the structure of the virus spike features that are not
resolved experimentally (for example, the transmembrane domain) and they use these structures to develop molecular dynamics simulations. Also, the MD trajectories reveal interesting dynamical features12 . Other theoretical studies consider
aspects with direct biomedical implications: investigations of
the molecular mechanisms related to the virus infection such
as the binding of the virus spike with human receptors13–15 ,
identification of targets for vaccine development16 and molecular studies related to drug development17–19 . The exceptionally of the situation also lead to most of the computational
groups working in this question to share the structures generated by their models and even full molecular dynamics trajectories, which are being deposited in public repositories such as
the COVID-19 Molecular Structure and Therapeutics Hub20 .
Our aim in this work is to contribute to these computational
efforts by considering an important aspect not previously considered in simulation studies, namely the question of the interaction of the SARS-CoV-2 virus with surfaces of materials.
There is substantial evidence that surfaces of materials contaminated by viruses (called fomites in the medical nomenclature) play an important role in human-to-human transmission
of many respiratory diseases of viral origin21–24 , including the
particular case of SARS-CoV-225 .
Many respiratory viruses are believed to spread from infected people through infected secretions such as saliva or
their respiratory droplets, which are expelled when an infected
person coughs, sneezes, talks or sings26 . These respiratory
droplets from infected individuals can land on objects, creating fomites (contaminated surfaces)25 . A recent review of
experimental and observational evidence indicates that coronaviruses deposited onto surfaces are able to remain infectious
from 2 hours up to 9 days24 , depending on the surface material and thermodynamic conditions such as humidity and temperature. In the case of SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2, evi-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.31.230888; this version posted September 25, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Submitted to Biointerphases

2

FIG. 1. (a) Electron microscopy image of a typical SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus particle, freely distributed by the NIAID’s Rocky Mountain
Laboratories (NIAID-RML)1 , colored to emphasize the virus structure. The spikes protruding from the virus envelope (in yellow color) are
clearly visible. Typical diameter ranges from 80 nm to 120 nm. (b) General scheme of a coronavirus indicating their main structural features.
We show the nucleocapsid (purple) that packages the viral RNA and the viral envelope. The major ingredients of the envelope are lipids
(pink), envelope protein E (in blue), membrane protein M (in red) and the protruding spike glycoproteins (in green). The scheme was made
by the authors using CellPAINT2 . (c) and (d) Snapshots of the atomistic structure of the SARS-CoV-2 trimeric glycoprotein spike available
at the Protein Data Bank (PDB:6VSB). The scale corresponds to 1 nm. In (c) the protein is shown in cartoon representation with different
colors for each monomer (grey, orange and red). The spike glycosylation is shown in yellow using Van der Waals representation. In (d) the
structure of one of the monomers is emphasized. It has a membrane-fusion subunit S2 (in red) and a receptor-binding subunit S1 which has two
independent domains (the receptor-binding domain RBD shown in green and the N-terminal domain NTD shown in blue). In this snapshot, the
spike was in the prefusion conformation and the RBD shown in green was in its receptor-accessible state (the so-called "up" conformation)3 .
The snapshots were created using VMD4 .

dences from different groups25 indicate that viable virus could
be detected up to 4 hours on copper, up to 24 hours on cardboard and up to 2-3 days on plastic and stainless steel. This
persistence of viable virus onto surfaces is the reason for recommendations of health authorities worldwide on continually
disinfecting and cleaning surfaces that are frequently touched.
At the present time, there is a lack of fundamental understanding of interactions between coronavirus and surfaces at
the physico-chemical level. We think that such a fundamental
knowledge could be very useful in the design and interpretation of experiments involving coronavirus on surfaces and
even contribute in the future to the rational design of disinfection measures.
In the case of coronavirus, it seems clear that the presence
of the spike coverage in the virus envelope will play an important role in the virus-surface interaction. The spike is not
only the most external feature of a coronavirus (see Figure 1)
but also a protein which has the ability to interact with other
molecules as its main function. Given the fact that the molec-

ular structure and atomistic coordinates of the SARS-CoV-2
virus spike are known3 , a timely question is to consider the
interaction between the spike and surfaces of materials. Starting from the available structure, we perform here atomistic
Molecular Dynamics simulations of the SARS-CoV-2 virus
spike and surfaces of materials in presence of hydration.
Concerning the materials to be studied, we remark here that
previous experimental studies indicated that in general the hydrophobic or hydrophilic nature of the surface plays an important role in the virus-surface interaction27,28 . Therefore,
we will consider here two materials with very different hydrophobic/hydrophilic character: cellulose and graphite. Cellulose is a material which is simultaneously hydrophilic and
lipophilic since due to its molecular structure29 both hydrogen bonding and the hydrophobic effect play an essential role.
In the case of graphite, its surface is strongly lipophilic and
mildly hydrophilic30 , unable to pursue hydrogen bonds and
prone to strong hydrophobic interactions. Both materials are
widely employed in adsorbents and filters.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.31.230888; this version posted September 25, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Submitted to Biointerphases

3

FIG. 2. a) Initial configuration for the simulation of the adsorption of a hydrated SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein onto a cellulose surface. The protein is represented as in Figure 1c with its
secondary structure with different colors for each monomer of the
trimeric protein (red, grey and orange) and the glycosylation in yellow. The solvation sphere is also indicated (transparent blue). b)
Detail (side view) of the cellulose surface. Buried -OH groups involved in cellulose-cellulose hydrogen bonds are indicated. c) Initial configuration for the simulationa of hydrated SARS-CoV-2 spike
glycoprotein on graphite surface. Color representation is the same as
in a). d) Detail (side view) of the graphite surface.

Up to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study involving the interaction of the SARS-CoV-2 virus external elements with materials. The results may be also relevant for
other coronavirus, since all of them share very similar spike
glycoproteins.

II.

SIMULATION RESULTS

A.

Adsorption onto cellulose and graphite

We have performed all-atomic Molecular Dynamics (MD)
simulations of a solvated glycoprotein spike near a cellulose
and a graphite surface, as shown in Figure 2. As seen in this
figure, we have considered the spike inserted inside a large
pre-equilibrated water droplet (∼ 6 × 104 water molecules).
The reason for the inclusion of water in the simulation is that it
is known that envelope virus (such as SARS-CoV-2) are transferred to surfaces in hydrated conditions (as discussed in the
Introduction) and it is also known that the virus needs to be
solvated in order to remain viable. The droplet also contains
Na+ counterions, neutralizing the charge (-23e) of the spike
(both surfaces are neutral). Full technical details of the models employed and the protocols of the simulations are given
in section IV Methods. The process of spike adsorption onto
both surfaces is shown in the video provided in the supporting
information (SI) and it is illustrated by the snapshots shown
in Figure 3. Additional snapshots, showing in more detail the
time evolution of the adsorption process during the simula-

FIG. 3. Representative snapshots of SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein
during the first and final adsorption stage onto cellulose (left) and
graphite (right) surfaces. The initial and final adsorption stage correspond to the time intervals indicated in section IV.Methods. Water
molecules were not shown for simplicity (see SI for visualization of
the solvation shell). The glycoprotein is shown with cartoon representation and glycans are shown in licorice representation. Each
monomer of the trimeric glycoprotein is shown with a different color
with the same color code as in Figure 2. The surface is shown with
line representation.

tions are provided in the SI. The time evolution of the different quantities characterizing the adsorption process is shown
in Figure 4.
The simulation results can be briefly summarized as follows. Initially, the spike adsorbs to both surfaces in a similar
way (Figure 3), through contact of the receptor binding subunits of the spike with the surface. In the case of cellulose,
this configuration is stable and the spike remains essentially
in this configuration during all the simulation. In the case of
adsorption onto graphite, the initial adsorption configuration
is not stable and the surface induces a substantial deformation
of the glycoprotein spike.
In order to discuss the results in more detail, it is useful
to divide the adsorption process into two different stages, an
initial stage corresponding to the contact of the spike with the
surface and a final stage reached after structural changes of
the spike over the surface.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.31.230888; this version posted September 25, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Submitted to Biointerphases

FIG. 4. Time evolution of physical quantities in the MD simulations of SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein adsorption onto surfaces.
(a) Number of residues in contact with each surface as a function of
time. (b) RMSD as function of time. c) Fraction of helix structures in
the glycoprotein as function of time. d) Fraction of beta sheet structures in the glycoprotein as a funtion of time. Blue lines correspond
to the adsorption on the cellulose surface, while red lines correspond
to adsorption on the graphite surface. Yellow and grey areas indicate
the approximate location of the initial and final adsorption stage time
intervals used in the calculations (see the section IV.Methods for the
precise definition).

1.

Initial adsorption stage

Full contact between the glycoprotein and the surfaces is
established after t ∼ 10 ns of simulation in both cases, as
indicated by the stabilization of the number of aminoacids
in contact with the surface seen in Figure 4a. The number
of aminoacids in contact with the surface remains relatively
stable for both surfaces (i.e. without abrupt changes) up to
t ∼ 20 ns, as seen in Figure 4a. We will consider this time
interval (with about ∼ 60 aminoacids of the spike in direct
contact with the surfaces) as the initial adsorption stage, as
highlighted in Figure 4. Illustrative snapshots of this stage are

4

FIG. 5. 2-D volumetric map of the residues in contact with cellulose
(left panels) and graphite (right panels) surfaces during the initial and
final stage of adsorption (see section IV.Methods for details). The
background grid spacing correspond to 1 nm. Color representation
correspond to RBD domain (green), NTD domain (blue) and S2 domain + glycans (red). On top of the volumetric map is the structure
of NTD and RBD in transparent cartoon representation.

shown in the top panels of Figure 3.
After adsorption (t ∼ 10 ns), the RMSD between the adsorbed spike structure in absence of a surface and the adsorbed
structure is ∼5 Å for both surfaces (Figure 4b), indicating a
small structural change during adsorption. In the case of adsorption onto cellulose, the RMSD remains constant during
the initial adsorption stage but it steadily increases with time
in the case of graphite. This can be considered as a indication
that this adsorbed configuration of the spike onto graphite is
not stable, as we will see.
Comparison of the snapshots in Figure 3 and the structure
shown in Figure 2d suggests that this initial adsorption of the
spike at the surfaces is made through contact between the surfaces and the subunit S1 of each monomer of the spike. This
is confirmed by a detailed description of the contact region between the spike and the surface, as shown by the contacts map
in Figure 5. As seen in this figure, in both cases (cellulose and
graphite), the adsorption involves three RBD and two NTD
domains of the receptor-binding subunit S1. In this initial
stage, the spike has a similar distribution of contacts with both

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.31.230888; this version posted September 25, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Submitted to Biointerphases

5

surfaces although the distribution is more compact in the case
of the graphite surface. Therefore, all three monomers are involved in the adsorption process, although in one monomer
only the RBD domain is involved and in two monomers both
the RBD and NTD domains of the S1 unit are involved. There
is only slight contact between the surfaces and glycans or with
the S2 subunit of the monomers.

2.

Final adsorption stage

After a similar initial adsorption process, the subsequent
evolution reflects (Figures 4a,b) the substantial differences between adsorption onto cellulose and graphite. In the case of
the graphite surface, both the number of residues in contact
with the surface and the RMSD show substantial evolution
with time including abrupt changes (for example at t ∼ 40 ns)
whereas it shows only minor time evolution in the case of the
cellulose surface. At long times (t ∼75 ns), the spike adsorption onto graphite stabilizes, so we can define a final stage,
as indicated in Figure 4, to compare the obtained structures
for both surfaces. The most remarkable feature of the final
stage is the striking deformation and curvature of the spike
towards the graphite surface seen in Figure 3. This deformation is reflected in the large number of contacts of the spike
with the graphite surface, which is near 100 residues in contact, as seen in Figure 4a. This deformation of the spike over
the graphite surface involve structural changes captured by the
time evolution of the RMSD (Figure 4b). The RMSD stabilizes at ∼ 18 Å at the final stage, which implies a substantial
structural change induced by graphite.
In the case of the cellulose surface, the number of residues
of the glycoprotein in contact with the surface remains approximately constant (∼ 50) between the initial and final adsorption stages. The RMSD remains at ∼ 5 Å up to simulation
times of t ∼ 50 ns, and after that it increases slowly reaching
∼ 8 Å. This change in RMSD corresponds to a slight deformation of the protein to increase its contact with the surface
accompanied by a slight change of the orientation of the main
axis towards the cellulose surface (see snapshot in Figure 3).
Figure 5 also shows substantial differences between the surface of contact between the spike and cellulose or graphite, as
should be expected from Figure 3. The contacts between the
spike and cellulose changed only slightly from the initial to
the final stage whereas in the case of graphite the region of
contact increased substantially, due to the deformation of the
spike discussed above. Figure 5 also shows that in the case of
graphite the adsorption involves not only the receptor-binding
subunit S1 but also a substantial contact with the membranefusion subunit S2. Therefore, the substantial deformation of
the spike observed in Figure 3 involves the adsorption of the
membrane-fusion subunit S2 at the graphite surface.
Interestingly, neither the adsorption to graphite or cellulose
induce changes in the secondary structure of the spike. According to Figures 4b,c there is no significant change in the
secondary structure of the spike due to adsorption over surfaces since the percentage of α-helix (Figure 4c) and β sheets
(Figure 4d) structures in the spike remain almost constant.

FIG. 6. Average number of spike aminoacids (3-letter code) in
contact with cellulose (blue) or graphite (red) during (a) the initial
stage of adsorption and (b) the final stage of adsorption (see section IV.Methods for details of the calculation). Each aminoacid is
also classified into charged (positive or negative), neutral polar, hydrophobic or special cases. Glycans of the spike protein are also
included. Standard error bars are too small to be seen at the scale of
the figure.

This could be related to the fact that the spike is known to
be rather flexible. In fact, it has been suggested31 that the
mechanism of biding of the spike of coronaviruses to diverse
host cell receptors is based on the flexibility of the spike.
Before entering into a more detailed analysis of the spikesurface interactions, we would like to add a comment about
the ions present in the simulation. As we mentioned before,
the simulation also contains Na+ counterions to neutralize the
spike charge. The ions are observed to be mostly condensed
at the spike, without being involved in the adsorption process.
It is likely that the reason for this observation is that both surfaces are neutral and the spike is strongly charged.

B.

Detailed analysis of protein-surface contacts

In order to obtain a deeper understanding of the adsorption results described in the previous subsection, we have performed a more detailed study of the particular aminoacids in-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.31.230888; this version posted September 25, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Submitted to Biointerphases
volved in the protein-surface interaction. In Figure 6, we show
the number of spike aminoacids in contact with cellulose or
graphite, classified by aminoacid type, for both the initial and
final adsorption stage.
In the initial stage (Figure 6a), we obtain a very similar
distribution of residues of the spike in contact with both cellulose and graphite. The only difference is a slight tendency of
graphite to favour more contacts with hydrophobic residues.
In both cases, there is a substantial contribution from neutral
polar aminoacids with ∼ 24 − 25 contacts (∼42-44% of contacts). The most abundant residue in contact with the surface
is ASN (Asparagine) with an average of about ∼ 10 contacts
(∼17.5% of the total).
Overall, our results in Figures 5 and 6 imply that in the initial adsorption stage, the nature of the surface plays a minor
role. In both cases, the spike is able to adsorb to both surfaces through essentially the same aminoacids located in the
receptor-binding subunits S1 of the trimeric spike. However, it
is possible that the magnitude of the interaction should be different for the different surfaces, given their different character
regarding hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions.
In order to compare the magnitude of the spike-surface interactions for both cases, we have performed additional simulations using the steering molecular dynamics technique. In
these simulations, the spike is pulled from the surface at constant velocity and the required detachment force is monitored.
Our results (reported in Appendix A), indicate that the detachment forces are very similar for both surfaces at the initial
adsorption stage. For the faster detachment velocity (5nm/ns)
the detachment force for both surfaces is very similar. As we
reduce the detachment velocity the difference in the maximum
force between graphite and cellulose becomes more important, with graphite requiring a larger force to detach the glycoprotein from the surface (see Figure 8 in Appendix A).
This higher detachment force for the graphite surface could
be related to the density of contacts as shown in Figure 5 at
the initial adsorption stage. As seen in that figure, the graphite
tends to form a more dense contact surface with the spike glycoprotein, which may require a larger force to detach from
the surface. In any case, this comparison between detachment
forces should be considered with caution, since these SMD
simulations are noisy, experiencing substantial fluctuations.
The results for the analysis of the aminoacids involved in
the protein-surface interaction during the final stage (Figure
6b) reflect the different evolution for the adsorption of the
spike on cellulose or on graphite, in line with the results discussed in the previous subsection. In the case of graphite,
the differences between the initial stage and the final stage in
Figure 6 are obviously due to the deformation of the spike after adsorption described in the previous subsection. The total
number of contacts of the spike with graphite increased from
an average of ∼59.2 contacts in the initial stage to ∼ 102.8 in
the final stage.
Again, the most abundant residue in contact with the
graphite surface is ASN (asparagine) with an average of about
∼ 17 contacts corresponding to a prominent peak in Figure
6b . This result is consistent with previous simulations that
indicated a strong affinity of asparagine with carbon aromatic

6
rings32 . The final stage of adsorption at the graphite surface is
dominated by contacts with asparagine, threonine, serine and
glutamine neutral polar aminoacids but there is also a substantial number of contacts with hydrophobic aminoacids such as
tyrosine, valine or leucine and with the glycans covering the
lateral regions of the spike.
In the case of cellulose, the number of contacts remains
nearly the same (only a very slight decrease in the total number of contacts, from a total of 55.6 in the initial stage to 54.2
in the final stage). Comparison between Figure 6a and Figure 6b shows very minor changes. In the final stage there
are slightly more contacts with charged aminoacids and less
contacts with hydrophobic aminoacids than those obtained in
the initial stage. Therefore, the small changes observed in the
previous subsection (both in the RMSD and the map of contacts, Figures 4b and 5) can be attributed to a rearrangement
of the protein at the surface to increase interactions with hydrophilic aminoacids and reduce the contacts with hydrophobic aminoacids, without significantly changing the number
of contacts. In any case, Figure 6 shows a wide variety of
residues with different chemical affinity in contact with cellulose. Again the peak in the case of asparagine is the most
noticeable feature for the case of cellulose in Figure 6b, with
∼ 10 contacts (which corresponds to ∼19% of contacts).

C.

Detailed analysis of protein-cellulose hydrogen bonds

Overall, our results indicate that in the case of cellulose the
spike is immobilized after adsorption, experiencing only minor changes during the adsorption process. This effect could
be due to some sort of stabilizing interaction, that anchors the
aminoacids of the receptor binding domain (RBD) after touching the surface.
Since the surface of cellulose has a large hydrogen bonding
ability, this interaction could be responsible for the observed
stabilization. In order to check this possibility, we have analyzed in detail the presence of hydrogen bonds between the
spike and the cellulose surface (Figure 7). In Figure 7a, we
show the number of direct hydrogen bonds between the spike
and the cellulose surface. Similar to what is observed in Figures 4a and 4b with the number of contacts and the RMSD, the
number of hydrogen bonds stabilizes after ∼10 ns of simulation time and fluctuates around an average of ∼18 hydrogen
bonds total during the rest of the simulation. Further identification of these hydrogen bonds reveals that they are mostly
located on the RBD domain of the glycoprotein, constituting
almost ∼ 75% of the total hydrogen bonds.
In Figure 7b, we report the number of hydrogen bonds for
each aminoacid type together with the number of aminoacidspike contacts. In the case of the neutral polar asparagine and
serine, a significant number of the aminoacid-cellulose contacts involve hydrogen bonding. It is also interesting to note a
significant number of hydrogen bonds with cellulose from the
aminoacids of hydrophobic character leucine (LEU) and tyrosine (TYR) that have also the possibility of hydrogen bonding.
Probably the amphiphilic character of cellulose29 tends to enhance the interaction with these aminoacids.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.31.230888; this version posted September 25, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Submitted to Biointerphases

7
III.

FIG. 7. Hydrogen bonds analysis. a) Time evolution of the number
of hydrogen bonds between the spike and cellulose. b) Comparison of the distribution of contacts and hydrogen bonds by residues
during the final stage of adsorption. c) Simulation snapshot (t = 45
ns) with a detail of some spike residues sharing hydrogen bonds
with solvation water and cellulose). Highlighted spike residues are
SER:443:B, ASN:450:B and TYR:449:B. The dotted lines indicate
hydrogen bonds. Both cellulose and aminoacids are shown in licorice
representation with CPK colors.

Hydrogen bonding between the spike and cellulose is more
complex than simply due to direct cellulose-spike hydorgen
bonds. A closer look to the formation of hydrogen bonds between the spike and cellulose reveals the existence of hydration water molecules that share hydrogen bonds with cellulose
and aminoacids. In Figure 7c we can observe that three of the
aminoacids with larger contributions in the number of hydrogen bonds in Figure 7b (ASN, SER and TYR) also form bridging hydrogen bonds with surrounding water, which makes hydrogen bonds with both the aminoacid and the cellulose surface.
Overall, this complex hydrogen bond network mainly located at the interface of the RBD domain tends to stabilize the
spike glycoprotein on the cellulose surface and is possibly responsible for the differences in deformation observed between
cellulose and graphite surfaces observed in Figure 3.

CONCLUSIONS

In this work we presented molecular dynamics simulation
of the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein interacting with two
different surfaces: cellulose and graphite. The choice of these
surfaces was made in order to compare two different materials
with very different properties. Cellulose is a complex molecular material with amphiphilic properties and a high quantity
of hydrogen bonds donors and receptors. Previous works (see
for example ref29 and references therein) demonstrated the capacity of cellulose to bind proteins by both hydrogen bonding
and hydrophobic interactions. On the contrary, graphite is a
crystalline hydrophobic material with no hydrogen bond capability. It is also known to be able to bind peptides and proteins via hydrophobic interactions (see for example32 or the
discussion in Ref33 ).
Our simulation results can be summarized as follows:
Initially, the spike adsorbs to both surfaces through essentially the same residues belonging to the receptor binding subunit of its three monomers (in particular, involving all three
receptor-binding domains (RBD) and two N-terminal domain
(NTD)). From this point the adsorption on each surface dramatically differs.
Adsorption onto cellulose stabilizes in the initial adsorption configuration with the help of a large number of hydrogen bonds developed between cellulose and the three receptor binding domains (RBD) of the glycoprotein spike. This
adsorbed configuration also includes shared hydration water
between the spike and cellulose. In the case of adsorption
onto graphite, the initial adsorption configuration is not stable
and the surface induces a substantial deformation of the glycoprotein spike with a large number of adsorbed residues not
pertaining to the binding subunits of the spike monomers.
It is interesting to note that our results are in line with previous MD results of other proteins at these surfaces. Cellulose
tends to adsorb proteins in stable configurations without structural changes29 whereas the interaction with graphite induce
substantial structural effects on adsorbed proteins33 .
Concerning the possible practical implications of these results, obviously we need to remark that the present study is a
simplification, since it ignores important effects such as the
process of approach of the full virus to the surface, which
is dominated by long range forces. Nonetheless, this represents the final stage of the adhesion of a virus with a surface,
in which the most external element (the spike) interacts with
the surface and it provides a reasonable approximation to the
affinity between the virus particle and a given surface. With
all these precautions in mind, we can say that our results suggest that interactions with cellulose will tend to maintain the
integrity of the hydrated SARS-CoV-2 virus spike. Also, interactions with graphite deform the spike and may potentially
help to inactivate the infectious potential of the spike glycoproteins interacting with the surface. As a recommendation
for future experimental investigations, it will be of great interest to investigate the viability of the virus over carbon surfaces, in particular given the importance of these materials for
filtration applications.
Our study has to be considered a first step in the understand-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.31.230888; this version posted September 25, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Submitted to Biointerphases
ing of the molecular interactions between the SARS-CoV-2
virus and surfaces. Of course, our study has many limitations
and further work is necessary in order to understand many relevant factors that are beyond the scope of this paper. One obvious limitation is that in our simulations we considered only
the (hydrated) spike glycoprotein of the SARS-CoV-2 virus
but not the virus a whole.
The molecular scale analysis of the virus-surface interaction is only one of the relevant aspects that need to be considered in order to understand the interaction between this SARSCoV-2 virus and materials. Other factors operating at larger
length scales need also to be considered. For example, experimental studies for other viruses show evidence that porosity
and nanostructuration of the surfaces at scales of the order of
the virus size also have an impact28 .
Also, modelling of the respiratory droplets embedding the
virus (which contain mucosal biopolymers, lipids and salts34 )
and how these droplets interact with materials and textiles is
of the highest interest. A simulation study of these factors
will require the use of mesoscale models, which may be build
from relevant experimental data -which is still unavailable- or
eventually from the results of atomistic molecular modelling,
as has been done recently for mesoscale simulations of a full
influenza virus35 .

IV.
A.

METHODS
Simulation models and forcefields

All Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations reported in this
paper were performed using NAMD 2.13 software36 . The
preparation of the simulation models and most of the analysis were made using Visual Molecular Dynamics (VMD)
software4 . The force field employed in the simulations is
the CHARMM36 force field which includes parametrization of carbohydrate derivatives, polysaccharides and carbohydrate–Protein interactions37 . This forcefield is therefore appropriate for describing both the spike glycoprotein
and all materials considered in the paper. The water model
used in our simulations was the TIP3P model included in
CHARMM36.
The atomic coordinates for the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein structure were obtained from a cryo-EM structure3
solved at 3.46 Å average resolution (PDB ID: 6VSB). This
structure contains S1 and S2 spike subunits (with one RBD
domain in "up" conformation) and a glycosylation pattern
characterized by N-Acetyl-D-Glucosamine (NAG) residues,
as shown in Figures 2c and 2d. The only modification made
to this initial structure was the addition with VMD of missing hydrogen atoms and connecting links between the protein
aminoacids and the NAG residues. The obtained structure
contains 46,708 atoms and its total charge (assuming pH 7)
is -23e.
It should be noted that the glycosylation pattern present
in this structure only includes glycans in close proximity to
the protein due to lack of further information on the resolved
structure of the spike. We are aware of ongoing work on the

8
development of more accurate models of the spike in order
to include details not resolved in the available structures12,16
such as improved models of the glycosylation. We think that
these details, which are essential in questions such as recognition of the spike by the immune system or its interaction
with specific receptors will not be essential in the study of the
interaction of the spike with extended surfaces. In any case,
developments on improved spike models should be carefully
considered in future simulations of the virus interactions with
materials.
The spike structure was solvated using VMD with an spherical solvation shell in order to maintain its hydrated functional
state. The number of TIP3P water molecules added to solvate
the glycoprotein was 60,642. We also added 23 Na+ counterions to neutralize the charge of the spike. The system made
by the hydrated spike with counterions has a total of 228,657
atoms.
The structures of the surfaces were built as follows. The
cellulose structure was built using the Cellulose builder
toolkit38 from a cut of the crystallographic plane (100) from
cellulose Iβ crystal structure as in our previous work29 . We
selected the (100) cellulose surface because it is the structurally simplest and smoothest surface that can be generated
from cutting the Iβ cellulose crystal structure (see for example Figure 2 in Ref29 ). In any case, our previous studies29
show that the different surfaces of cellulose have similar wetting properties and similar hydrogen bonding capacity. An interesting feature of the (100) cellulose surface is that it has
"buried" -OH groups involved in cellulose-cellulose hydrogen bonds that can be broken to generate hydrogen bonds of
cellulose with adsorbing molecules (see for example Fig.3 in
Ref29 ). The generated cellulose structure has a surface with
dimensions of 26.1 nm ×25.08 nm and a thickness of 3.18 nm
(8 molecular layers) as seen in Figure 2b. The cellulose structure has 252,000 atoms and the full simulation box with the
hydrated spike, Na+ counterions and cellulose has 480,633
atoms.
The graphite structure was build using the inorganic builder
plugin of VMD4 by replicating the unit cell 100 times in a,
100 times in b and 3 times in c direction. A detail of the
surface can be observed in Figure 2c. Since graphite has
a hexagonal crystal structure, we used also periodic boundary conditions with the same geometry, with simulation box
vectors (in nm) a=(12.28,-21.27,0.00), b=(12.28,21.27,0.00),
c=(0.00,0.00,40.0). The graphite structure has 120,000 atoms
and the full simulation box (hydrated spike, counterions and
surface) contains 348,654 atoms.
We recall here that all surfaces considered in our simulations are neutral.

B.

Molecular Dynamics simulations protocols

The protocol followed in all simulations includes an initial
minimization, equilibration and production runs. In all simulations Newton’s equations of motion were integrated with
a 2 fs time step and electrostatic interactions were updated
every 4 fs. All bonds between heavy atoms and hydrogen

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.31.230888; this version posted September 25, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Submitted to Biointerphases

9

atoms were keep rigid. All simulations were performed in
the NVT ensemble with a Langevin thermostat set at 298 K
and a damping coefficient of 1 ps−1 . We employed periodic
boundary conditions in all directions. Lennard-Jones interactions were computed with a cutoff of 1.2 nm and a switching
function starting at 1.0 nm. Electrostatic interactions were
computed using Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) algorithm using
a real space cutoff set at 1.2 nm and a PME grid of 1.0 Å.
We performed three different MD simulations. First, we
performed a preliminary simulation (19 ns) of the solvated
spike at 298K. Employing the results of the preliminary simulation as starting configuration, we have performed MD simulations of the protein spike adsorption onto cellulose and
graphite. The equilibrated spike inside a water droplet was
positioned at 2 Å away from the surface, as shown in 2. The
simulation trajectory was run for 83.4 ns in the case of adsorption onto cellulose and 88.5 ns in the case of graphite.

ent secondary structure components. Hydrogen bonds (Figure
7) were computed using VMD. We used an acceptor-donor
distance cutoff of 3.5 Å and acceptor-hydrogen-donor angle
cutoff of 30 degrees.

C.

Appendix A: Protein detachment by Steered Molecular
Dynamics

Analysis of results

The snapshots and movies of the simulations were made
using Visual Molecular Dynamics (VMD) software4 . The different analysis were made using VMD tools and appropriate
scripts as follows.
As discussed in the main paper, for convenience in the analysis we introduce an initial adsorption stage and a the final adsorption stage. In the calculations of averaged quantities, the
exact definition of these stages is as follows. We define the initial adsorption stage as the time interval between 12.55-19.44
ns for simulations of adsorption over the cellulose surface and
between 11.0-21.0 ns for the case of graphite surface. Similarly, we define the final adsorption stage as the time interval
between 74.5-83.4 ns for the simulation with cellulose and
between 78.5-88.5 ns for the simulation with graphite. Note
that this choice of time intervals is related to simplicity in data
handling and the time intervals shown in Figure 4 are not exact (since the exact definitions slightly differ for each surface)
but approximate for illustrative purposes.
The number of aminoacids in contact with each surface
(Figure 4a) was computed considering that a contact between
aminoacids and surface occurs when at least one atom of the
aminoacid is found at a distance smaller than 3.5 Å from any
surface atom. In order to co count the number of aminoacids
at each time timestep we employed a TCL script running
on VMD implementing the distance requirement described
above. The distribution of residues in contact with the surfaces (Figure 6) was calculated over the initial and final adsorption stage with a similar TCL script, averaging over the
intervals defined above. The 2-D contact map (Figure 6) was
calculated using VMD Volmap tool for residues at distance of
less than 3.5 Å from surface atoms. The root mean squared deviation (RMSD) reported in Figure 4b was computed between
each instantaneous structure and the initial structure using the
RMSD trajectory tool implemented in VMD4 . The analysis
of secondary structure as function of time in Figures 4c and
4d was made using the timeline tool in VMD, which uses
the STRIDE algorithm39 to calculate the fraction of differ-

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation through grant RTI2018-096273-B-I00
and the “Severo Ochoa” Grant SEV-2015-0496 for Centres
of Excellence in R&D awarded to ICMAB. We thank the
CESGA supercomputing center for computer time and technical support at the Finisterrae supercomputer. D. C. Malaspina
is supported by the European Union Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme under Marie Sklodowska-Curie
COFUND grant agreement No. 6655919.

The detachment force of the spike at cellulose and graphite
surfaces adsorbed at the initial adsorption stage (Figure 3) was
calculated using the Steered Molecular Dynamics technique40
(SMD) as implemented in NAMD. The SMD simulations
were conducted starting from the configuration obtained in the
MD simulations at 21.0 ns for adsorption onto the cellulose
surface and 19.44 ns for the graphite case. The spike glycoprotein was pulled from the center of mass of the residues
located at less than 4nm from the surface, this roughly correspond to the RBD and NTD domains. The parameters for the
SMD simulation are the same as previous simulations with
the addition of a forcing to the spike (force constant 2×104
kcal/mol/Å2 ) ensuring a constant velocity of pulling that was
set to 1 nm/ns, 2 nm/ns and 5 nm/ns. According to these velocities the simulation time was selected in order to obtain a
separation of at least 2 nm between the spike and the surface.
As a result, in SMD we obtain force-separation curves corresponding to each pulling velocity. These forces as a function of spike-surface distance obtained in the SMD simulations were rather noisy (as usual in SMD simulations) so they
were smoothed with a running average.
We should keep in mind that the obtained forces from the
SMD simulations correspond to nonequilibrium processes in
which the motion of the spike will experience a viscous drag
(which depends on velocity) in addition to the adhesion force.
This viscous resistance can be identified by noting that the
force should decay to zero as the protein separates from the
surface. In the SMD simulations, we observe a decay of the
force with distance to an approximately constant value. This
value can be taken as an approximation to the viscous resistance. Therefore, in order to remove the effect of viscous drag
and extract the adhesion force, we have shifted the force versus distance curves obtained in SMD so that they decay to
zero force at large spike-surface separations. The values of
the estimated viscous drag depend on the spike velocity in the
SMD simulations. For the simulations with the cellulose sur-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.31.230888; this version posted September 25, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Submitted to Biointerphases

FIG. 8. Force as a function of distance, from Stereed Molecular Dynamics (SMD) results, for cellulose (left panel) and graphite (right
panel) surface after the initial adsorption stage. Each line correspond
to a different pulling velocity: 1 nm/ns is represent with black line, 2
nm/ns with a red line and 5 nm/ns with a green line.

face they were 4,933 pN, 6598 pN and 11,150 pN for SMD
simulations of velocities of 1nm/ns, 2nm/ns and 5 nm/ns respectively. Similarly, the values in the case of simulations
with the graphite surface for SMD simulations with velocities 1nm/ns, 2nm/ns and 5 nm/ns were 4,390 pN, 7,489 pN
and 11,797 pN respectively. The force versus distance curves
obtained after this process were shown in Figure 8.
For the faster detachment velocity (5nm/ns) maximum
force in both surfaces is approximately similar, been ∼8100
pN for cellulose surface and ∼8500 pN for the graphite surface. As we reduce the detachment velocity the difference in
the maximum force between graphite and cellulose becomes
more important, with graphite requiring a larger force to detach the glycoprotein from the surface. At the lower detachment velocity (1 nm/ns) the maximum force for cellulose surface is ∼4900 pN and ∼6200 pN for the graphite surface.

REFERENCES

1 National

Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID),
“https://www.flickr.com/photos/niaid/albums/72157712914621487,”.
2 A. Gardner, L. Autin, B. Barbaro, A. J. Olson, and D. S. Goodsell, IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications 38, 51 (2018).
3 D. Wrapp, N. Wang, K. S. Corbett, J. A. Goldsmith, C.-L. Hsieh,
O. Abiona, B. S. Graham, and J. S. McLellan, Science 367, 1260 (2020).
4 W. Humphrey, A. Dalke, and K. Schulten, Journal of Molecular Graphics
14, 33 (1996).
5 A. E. Gorbalenya, S. C. Baker, R. S. Baric, R. J. de Groot, C. Drosten, A. A.
Gulyaeva, B. L. Haagmans, C. Lauber, A. M. Leontovich, B. W. Neuman,
D. Penzar, S. Perlman, L. L. Poon, D. V. Samborskiy, I. A. Sidorov, I. Sola,
and J. Ziebuhr, Nature Microbiology 5, 536 (2020).
6 World
Health Organization, “WHO Timeline - COVID-19

10
https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/29-06-2020-covidtimeline,”
(2020).
7 D. Schoeman and B. C. Fielding, Virology Journal 16, 69 (2019).
8 R. Yan, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, L. Xia, Y. Guo, and Q. Zhou, Science 367, 1444
(2020).
9 P. Zhou, X.-L. Yang, X.-G. Wang, B. Hu, L. Zhang, W. Zhang, H.-R. Si,
Y. Zhu, B. Li, C.-L. Huang, H.-D. Chen, J. Chen, Y. Luo, H. Guo, R.-D.
Jiang, M.-Q. Liu, Y. Chen, X.-R. Shen, X. Wang, X.-S. Zheng, K. Zhao,
Q.-J. Chen, F. Deng, L.-L. Liu, B. Yan, F.-X. Zhan, Y.-Y. Wang, G.-F. Xiao,
and Z.-L. Shi, Nature 579, 270 (2020).
10 H. Berman, K. Henrick, and H. Nakamura, Nature Structural & Molecular
Biology 10, 980 (2003).
11 H. Woo, S. J. Park, Y. K. Choi, T. Park, M. Tanveer, Y. Cao, N. R. Kern,
J. Lee, M. S. Yeom, T. I. Croll, C. Seok, and W. Im, The journal of physical
chemistry. B 124, 7128 (2020).
12 L. Casalino, Z. Gaieb, A. C. Dommer, A. M. Harbison, C. A. Fogarty, E. P. Barros, B. C. Taylor, E. Fadda, and R. E. Amaro, bioRxiv ,
2020.06.11.146522 (2020).
13 J. He, H. Tao, Y. Yan, S.-Y. Huang, and Y. Xiao, Viruses 12, 428 (2020).
14 E. S. Brielle, D. Schneidman-Duhovny, and M. Linial, Viruses 12 (2020),
10.3390/v12050497.
15 N. Forouzesh and A. V. Onufriev, bioRxiv , 2020.08.25.267625 (2020).
16 O. C. Grant, D. Montgomery, K. Ito,
and R. J. Woods, bioRxiv ,
2020.04.07.030445 (2020).
17 R. Hatada, K. Okuwaki, Y. Mochizuki, K. Fukuzawa, Y. Komeiji,
Y. Okiyama, and S. Tanaka, (2020), 10.26434/CHEMRXIV.11988120.V1.
18 J. Wang, Journal of chemical information and modeling
(2020),
10.1021/acs.jcim.0c00179.
19 Y. Han and P. Král, ACS Nano 14, 5143 (2020).
20 “COVID-19
Molecular
Structure
and
Therapeutics
Hub
https://covid.molssi.org/,”.
21 P. Vasickova, I. Pavlik, M. Verani, and A. Carducci, Food and Environmental Virology 2, 24 (2010).
22 L. M. Casanova, S. Jeon, W. A. Rutala, D. J. Weber, and M. D. Sobsey,
Applied and Environmental Microbiology 76, 2712 (2010).
23 J. Otter, C. Donskey, S. Yezli, S. Douthwaite, S. Goldenberg, and D. Weber,
Journal of Hospital Infection 92, 235 (2016).
24 G. Kampf, D. Todt, S. Pfaender, and E. Steinmann, Journal of Hospital
Infection 104, 246 (2020).
25 N. van Doremalen, T. Bushmaker, D. H. Morris, M. G. Holbrook, A. Gamble, B. N. Williamson, A. Tamin, J. L. Harcourt, N. J. Thornburg, S. I.
Gerber, J. O. Lloyd-Smith, E. de Wit, and V. J. Munster, New England
Journal of Medicine 382, 1564 (2020).
26 WHO, “Transmission of SARS-CoV-2:
implications for infection
prevention precautions https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/modes-oftransmission-of-virus-causing-covid-19-implications-for-ipc-precautionrecommendations,” (2020).
27 H. T. Dang and V. V. Tarabara, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science
540, 155 (2019).
28 A. Guo, Y. C. Shieh, and R. R. Wang, Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects 602, 125109 (2020).
29 D. C. Malaspina and J. Faraudo, Advances in Colloid and Interface Science
267, 15 (2019).
30 A. Kozbial, F. Zhou, Z. Li, H. Liu, and L. Li, Accounts of Chemical Research 49, 2765 (2016).
31 R. N. Kirchdoerfer, N. Wang, J. Pallesen, D. Wrapp, H. L. Turner, C. A.
Cottrell, K. S. Corbett, B. S. Graham, J. S. McLellan, and A. B. Ward,
Scientific Reports 8, 15701 (2018).
32 A. N. Camden, S. A. Barr, and R. J. Berry, Journal of Physical Chemistry
B 117, 10691 (2013).
33 D. C. Malaspina, L. Pérez-Fuentes, C. Drummond, D. Bastos-González,
and J. Faraudo, Current Opinion in Colloid & Interface Science 41, 40
(2019).
34 W. C. K. Poon, A. T. Brown, S. O. L. Direito, D. J. M. Hodgson, L. Le Nagard, A. Lips, C. E. MacPhee, D. Marenduzzo, J. R. Royer, A. F. Silva,
J. H. J. Thijssen, and S. Titmuss, Soft Matter , (2020).
35 J. D. Durrant, S. E. Kochanek, L. Casalino, P. U. Ieong, A. C. Dommer,
and R. E. Amaro, ACS Central Science 6, 189 (2020).
36 J. C. Phillips, R. Braun, W. Wang, J. Gumbart, E. Tajkhorshid, E. Villa,
C. Chipot, R. D. Skeel, L. Kalé, and K. Schulten, Journal of Computational

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.31.230888; this version posted September 25, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Submitted to Biointerphases
Chemistry 26, 1781 (2005).
Guvench, S. S. Mallajosyula, E. P. Raman, E. Hatcher, K. Vanommeslaeghe, T. J. Foster, F. W. Jamison, and A. D. MacKerell, Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 7, 3162 (2011).
38 T. C. F. Gomes and M. S. Skaf, Journal of Computational Chemistry 33,

37 O.

11
1338 (2012).
Frishman and P. Argos, Proteins: Structure, Function, and Genetics 23,
566 (1995).
40 J. Hénin, G. Fiorin, C. Chipot, and M. L. Klein, Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 6, 35 (2010).

39 D.

